POWER PLANT COST ESCALATION  
Nuclear and Coal Capital Costs,  
Regulation, and Economics  
By Charles Komanoff  
Nuclear power has not become the inexpen­sive alternative to oil plants that nuclear pro­ponents have hoped for - reactor construc­tion costs have increased astronomically and  
continue to do so at an accelerating rate.  
Surprisingly little accurate information on  
these increases has been made available by  
the nuclear power industry, electric utilities,  
or overseeing government agencies. More­over, coal power plants may be an economi­cal alternative to nuclear plants.  
This timely reference source provides a  
thorough and definitive analysis of actual  
nuclear and coal capital costs. It gives you  
the vital data you need to estimate the true  
design, construction, and life-cycle costs of  
nuclear and coal power plants.  
Charles Komanoff identifies and analyzes  
the reasons for increasing costs. He cfearly  
demonstrates that capital cost increases !lave  
been primarily due to concern over plant  
safety and environmental pollution. You  
. will find out how efforts to drastically re­duce these risks have contributed to the  
spectacular rise in plant costs. Komanoff's  
review of cost increases and emissions reduc­tions establishes for the first time the ap­proximate cost of building clean coal plants ..  
And he also tells you what effect the Three  
Mile Island accident has had on cost esti- ·  
mates for proposed nuclear reactors.  
Power Plant Cost Escalation reveals just how  
large the cost gap is between nuclear and coal  
power plants and the dramatic difference in  
their rates of increase. Results of a lucid  
statistical analysis of actual plant costs over  
the last decade show how wrong previous  
studies have been on these matters.  
Coal and nuclear power plant designers and  
architects, electric utility executives, various  
personnel in government regulatory agencies,  
and all private citizens concerned with the  
rising costs of nuclear and coal power plants  
should have this essential data source. Stu·  
dents of energy policy, industrial policy, and  
regulation can also read Power Plant Cost  
Regulation as a case study of the wrenching  
changes in the utility industry in the 1 970s  
and 1980s.  
About the Author  
Charles Komanoff has been researching the  
U.S. electric power industry since 1971, and  
the nuclear power industry since 1974. He  
has written numerous articles on energy and  
energy poliqy issues, and is the author of  
several books, including Power Plant Perfor­mance: Nuclear and Coal Capacity Factors  
and Economics (Council on Economic Pri·  
orities) and The Price of Power: Electric  
Utilities and the Environment (fv1assachu·  
setts Institute of Technology Press). Probab·  
ly the most widely quoted critic in the Uni- ·  
ted States of nuclear power's economic per·  
formance, Mr. Komanoff has testified before  
many state regulatory agencies, four congres­sional committees, and the Select Committee  
·on Energy of the House of Commons, U.K.  
He is the founder of Komanoff Energy Asso·  
elates (KEA). a consulting firm that analyzes  
major issues in energy economics for state  
and .federal government ageneies and numer­ous private organizationsthroughout the U.S. '. . ... · '. POWER PLANT  
COST ESCALATION ERRATA SHEET  
Komanoff: POWER PLANT COST ESCALATION  
ISBN 0-442-24903-9  
Page 8. Second full paragraph, last full line, last  
word is itemizations.  
Page 248. Third full paragraph, second line, seventh  
word is appreciable.  
Page 255. Last full line inside box, citation ~s to  
Reference ~.  
Page 279. Middle paragraph in box, last line, factor is  
l+e raised to the 1-i power.  
Page 292. Second to last line, entries are percentage  
differences.  
Page 304. Third line of text, entries are percentage  
differences.  
Page 320. The first equation reads, dC/C divided by  
dR/R equals negative k. The second equation  
reads, integral of dC/C equals integral of  
negative k times dR/R. POWER PLANT  
COST ESCALATION  
Nuclear and Coal Capital Costs,  
Regulation, and Economics  
CHARLES KOMANOFF  
Foreword by  
I. C. BUPP Copyright© 1981 by Charles Komanoff  
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 82-8625  
ISBN: (}-442·24903·9  
All rights reserved. No part of this work covered by the copyright hereon may  
be reproduced or used in any form or by any means-graphic, electronic, or  
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, or information storage  
and retrieval systems-without permission of the publisher.  
Manufactured in the United States of America  
Published by Van Nostrand Reinhold Company Inc.  
135 West 50th Street, New York, N.Y. 10020  
Van Nostrand Reinhold Publishing  
1410 Birchmount Road  
Scarborough, Ontario MlP 2£7, Canada  
Van Nostrand Reinhold Australia Pty. Ltd.  
17 Queen Street  
Mitcham, Victoria 3132, Australia  
Van Nostrand Reinhold Company Limited  
Molly Millars Lane  
Wokingham, Berkshire, England  
15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1  
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data  
Komanoff, Charles.  
Power plant cost escalation.  
Reprint. Originally published: 1st ed. New York:  
Komanoff Energy Associates, c1981. (Publication I  
KomanoffEnergy Associates; KEA·12)  
L Atomic power-plants-Costs. 2. Coal f'lre power  
plants-Costs. l. Title. 11. Series: Publication  
(Komanoff Energy Associates); KEA-12.  
[TK1078.K648 1982] 338.4'3621312132 82-8628  
ISBN (}-442·24903-9 AACR2 Acknowledgments  
This book originated during a series of discussions in February 1978 with  
Vince Taylor, then a senior economist with Pan-Heuristics in Los Angeles and  
now with the Union of Concerned Scientists. Vince and I were examining nuclear  
capital cost data compiled by Bill Mooz of the Rand Corporation, and we were  
struck by the strong correlation Bill had found between capital costs and the date of  
construction start, even when costs were adjusted for inflation. We were dis­satisfied, however, with Bill's use of the passage of time to explain increases in  
capital costs, and we began to ruminate over the underlying factors that, acting  
over time, were leading to cost increases. This led us to consider the relationships  
among costs, regulatory criteria, and growth of the nuclear power sector, bringing  
us to the sector-size hypothesis which is developed in Chapter 3 and which  
permeates much of the book.  
Because Vince was occupied with writing Energy: The Easy Path and  
moving back to Vermont, it fell to me to develop a data base and cost analysis  
covering coal plants as well as nuclear, a task that consumed the rest of 1978 and  
much of 1979. Research on regulatory and design changes in nuclear and coal  
plants, both past and prospective, began in late 1979 and continued through final  
manuscript drafting in early 198!. Vince's guidance and ideas were invaluable  
during most of this work, particularly in refining the sector-size hypothesis.  
developing the statistical analysis, writing Chapter 2, and conceptualizing the  
book as a whole.  
Many other persons devoted considerable time to reviewing draft material,  
answering technical questions, and improving style and presentation. Foremost  
among them was Bill Steigelmann of Synergic Resources Corp., whose detailed  
comments significantly improved Chapter 4, especially the section on environ­mental qualification. Ernst Habicht, Jr., formerly energy projects director of the  
Environmental Defense Fund and now a private consultant on Long Island,  
enhanced the manuscript's rigor and clarity through his persistent constructive  
criticisms. Bob Pollard of the Union of Concerned Scientists reviewed several  
chapters and answered numerous technical questions. Others who improved the  
manuscript significantly or otherwise helped nurture the book include Stephen  
Baruch, Dale Bridenbaugh, Steve Cohn, Nancy Folbre, Richard Grossman, Dick  
Hubbard, Amory Lovins, Greg Minor, Ken Semmel, Louis Slesin, and Ellyn  
Weiss.  
The book owes much to the research of others. Bill Mooz's work helped me  
develop the concept of steam-plam dollars for measuring increases in power plant  
costs apart from inflation in construction factors. Bill also supplied the nuclear capital cost data that sparked Vince's and my early speculations, and his exhaus­tive and original regression modelling provided a firm base for mine here. Bill also  
generously furnished construction cash-flow equations and other key data in the  
early stages of the project. Chip Bupp and his colleagues at Harvard and MIT  
published exceedingly valuable and prescient work on nuclear costs during 1974- 
75 that anticipated many of the conclusions of this book. David Okrent, a  
long-time member of the Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards and pro­fessor of nuclear engineering at UCLA, provided a draft copy of his new book,  
Nuclear Reactor Safety: On the History of the Regulatory Process (University of  
Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI, 1981) which added greatly to my understanding  
of the evolution of nuclear power regulation.  
My information-gathering also required the help of many people. Scores of  
Nuclear Regulatory Commission staff members graciously sat through innumer­able interviews and telephone calls to answer questions concerning past and future  
regulatory changes. NRC regulatory reports and research studies were an invalu­able source of information, as were articles from Nuclear Safety, some of which  
editor Bill Cottrell kindly supplied when copies could not be obtained in New  
York. The staff of the Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards, particularly  
secretary Carol Ann Rowe, also provided helpful information and materials.  
My secretary, Janice Kay Young, patiently and expertly typed the manu­script through many drafts, organized my files, and procured research materials,  
all with an irreverent but supportive spirit that helped sustain my sanity at difficult  
times. Computer whiz Walter Bourne wrote the programs and file specifications  
that enabled me to develop the regression analyses which underlie much of the  
book. My production editor and erstwhile colleague, Wendy Schwartz, shep­herded manuscript into book with her customary skill and aplomb, and the staff of  
Journal Graphics ably handled typesetting and graphics.  
Finally, I gratefully acknowledge the support I have received over the years  
from many individuals and groups within the safe energy movement. And above  
all, I wish to thank my companion, Gail Daneker, for her constant strength, love  
and encouragement throughout the writing of this book.  
Charles Komanoff  
March 1981 Contents  
Foreword i  
I. Introduction And Sununary  
I. Introduction: Nuclear And Coal Capital Costs And Economics  
2. Summary: Cost Escalation At Nuclear And Coal Power  
Plants 14  
II. Changes In Plant Regulation And Design  
3. The Sources Of Nuclear Regulatory Requirements 45  
4. Changes In Reactor Design And Construction In The 1970s 67  
5. Future Nuclear Regulatory Requirements 123  
6. The Impact Of Three Mile Island On Nuclear Regulatory  
Requirements I 53  
7. Regulatory And Design Changes At Coal-Fired Power Plants 176  
III. Statistical Analyses Of Costs And Schedules  
8. Statistical Analysis Of Nuclear Plant Construction Costs And  
Durations I 97  
9. Statistical Analysis Of Coal Plant Construction Costs And  
Durations 213  
10. Changes In Nuclear And Coal Capital Costs And Construction  
Durations 227  
IV. Total Generating Costs  
II. Non-Capital Cost Factors 246  
12. Nuclear And Coal Generating Costs 278  
V. Appendices  
I. Nuclear Data Base 291  
2. Coal Data Base 302  
3. Conversion Of Capital Costs Into Constant Dollars 312  
4. Statistical Methodology 318  
5. Acronyms 322 Foreword  
Less than five years ago, few business leaders, politicians, or scholars  
doubted that cheap electricity from nuclear power would be an important  
bulwark in defending the oil-importing countries against further oil price  
increases or supply interruptions. Today, it is obvious that nuclear power is in  
deep trouble nearly everywhere. Only in France are nuclear power plants being  
built more or less on the scale projected in the mid- 1970s. And even the French  
nuclear construction program is, for the time being at least. proceeding in spite  
of skyrocketing costs.  
Since the mid-l970s. it has been increasingly apparent that the "post­OPEC'' expectations for rapid and cheap expansion of nuclear power were at  
odds with some harsh realities. From the beginning of commercial-scale  
nuclear power two decades ago, costs have always risen, never fallen.  
One might have expected documentation of these cost increases to come  
from the nuclear power industry, or at least from the electric utilities that  
purchase and operate nuclear power plants. The utilities have the cost data and  
anecdotal experience necessary for such analysis. and presumably they would  
be ardently interested in learning industry cost trends. But, reluctant to buck  
what my colleague, Jean-Claude Derian. and I have called the "extravagance  
of prophesy". that has long prevailed among nuclear power supporters, and  
wary about offering ammunition to its critics, the nuclear industry has pro­duced remarkably little analysis of its economic misfortunes. Nor have the  
industry's official government and academic sponsors produced any objective  
analysis of nuclear costs.  
That task has had to be assumed by outsiders. Derian and I were the first to  
show, in late 1974, that the cost of building reactors was increasing much  
faster than both the overall rate of inflation and the costs of other heavy  
construction projects. Two years later, Charles Komanoff demonstrated that  
nuclear plants were failing by a wide margin to meet their generating perfor­mance targets, with the largest reactors suffering the largest shortfalls. In  
1978, Bill Mooz at Rand showed that nuclear construction cost increases were  
continuing into the late seventies at an accelerating pace. Although each of  
these studies bore important messages for the nuclear industry. supporters of  
nuclear power largely ignored them.  
This book, although more pessimistic about nuclear power than its pre­decessors, is less likely to be ignored. For one thing, it appears at a time when  
some government and business leaders are beginning to question the need for a  
major expansion of nuclear power. It is now evident that energy consumers in  
the industrial countries are responding to the steeply rising prices of the I 970s  
with substantial efforts to conserve. Growth in electricity use has slowed  
Foreword significantly throughout the West, even though government policy in many  
countries still encourages electrification. In addition, the technology to reduce  
the most blatant environmental effects of coal burning is now apparently at  
hand, This development will be of little interest in countries that lack depend­able supplies of coal, but elsewhere it is beginning to blunt what has been an  
important argument in favor of nuclear power.  
This book will also be read. one hopes, because it brings us several strides  
closer to the actual reality of nuclear and coal economics. It rests upon a  
thorough and highly competent quantitative analysis of actual nuclear and coal  
capital cost experience. Indeed, one of the most impressive things about this  
book is how far a single analyst has been able to move beyond the lavishly  
funded efforts of large institutions like the National Academy of Sciences in  
basic data collection and analysis. Komanoff's robust estimates of the actual  
rates of nuclear and coal capital cost increases in the 1970s are a major  
contribution,  
Komanoff's account of past and prospective design changes for nuclear  
and coal plants is also both thorough and lucid. His review of cost increases  
and emission reductions for coal plants is especially valuable, establishing for  
the first time the approximate costs to build clean coal plants-or at least  
cleaner than oil-burning plants. Although these coal plants may not satisfy the  
most ardent environmentalists, they are likely to be clean enough to be licensed  
and built in most parts of the U.S. and almost anywhere else.  
The most difficult-and most important-problem in nuclear power  
economics is to project the cost of building new reactors. The electric utilities  
have failed badly at this and have lost precious credibility as a result-first  
among the public, and increasingly on Wall Street. Most utilities have been  
unable to anticipate the great many changes in design criteria for their plants,  
let alone the costs of the changes.  
Derian and I have argued that there is a direct causal link between nuclear  
power's rising costs and the controversy over reactor safety.* In our opinion,  
concern over reactor safety has become a profound political and economic  
force that has exerted a powerful, perhaps decisive, influence over the de­velopment of nuclear power technology. We have predicted since the mid­l970s that the costs of nuclear power were unlikely to stabilize as long as  
nuclear safety concerns-whether "rational" or "irrational"-were not  
appeased.  
Komanoff has extended this argument here, with a major new twist: he  
proposes that the capital cost increases in the nuclear sector are primarily the  
result of efforts to contain total accident and environmental risks that would  
otherwise have expanded in proportion with the growth of the sector. This is an  
'I. C. Bupp and J. C. Derian. The Failed Promise of Nuclear Prmer. Basic Books.  
lncJHarperColophon Books (New York. NY. 1981 ).  
ii Foreword important and challenging hypothesis, supported by both a quantitative anal­ysis of costs and an historical review of nuclear regulation. As a method of  
projecting nuclear capital costs. it may well come much closer to the mark than  
engineering estimation. But-and this is my only important analytic difference  
with the author-! question whether any model-statistical, engineering, or  
otherwise-can capture enough of the political. regulatory, and technological  
factors that together will determine the costs of new reactors.  
Pending further research and discussion-which I hope this book will  
stimulate-! continue to prefer my own hypothesis: the basic cause of the cost  
increases that are documented here is a breakdown of the democratic political  
process. The collapse of nuclear power we are now witnessing is at least in  
large part and perhaps nearly completely due to a basic change in the values of  
the governing middle classes of wealthy western society. Technological pro­gress. long taken for granted as the ultimate source of growing wealth, has  
come to be identified as the cause of some negative byproducts of that growth.  
Although Komanoff might not agree, I think the nuclear advocates are  
essentially correct in contending that the shifts in political power that followed  
this change in values profoundly affected the realization of their own dreams.  
Whether Komanoff's hypothesis about the future costs of nuclear power is  
confirmed depends, in my opinion, on whether the I 980s will bring new  
changes in perceptions, values, and behavior.  
As we wait for the future to bring the answer. we should be grateful to the  
author of this book for painstaking work in drawing such a rich picture of the  
past and for providing us with an excellent vantage point for observing  
changing events.  
Foreword  
I.C. Bupp  
Associate Professor of Business Administration  
Harvard Business School  
iii 1  
Introduction:  
Nuclear And Coal  
Capital Costs  
And Economics  
This book examines the upheaval in the economics of nuclear and coal  
electrical generation that occurred in the 1970s, and explores further changes  
likely in the next decade. It is the product of six years spent grappling with the  
economics of nuclear and coal power, the last three focusing on the costs of  
efforts to reduce the health, environmental, and societal hazards of electricity  
generation.  
The book investigates increases in nuclear and coal capital ( construc­tion) costs on three levels:  
• an empirical level, through the first published statistical analysis  
of the actual construction costs of U.S. nuclear and coal-fired  
power plants completed throughout the 1970s;  
• an engineering level, through an analysis of design and con­struction changes that contributed to past cost increases and  
those that can be anticipated to cause future increases;  
• an etiological (underlying causal) level, through development of  
an hypothesis to explain the growth in regulatory standards that  
spurred the design changes which increased plant costs.  
Section 1.1: Major Findings  
The conclusions of this book differ radically from the views generally  
held within the federal government, the electric power industry (utilities,  
reactor vendors, and architect-engineers), and the technical and policy com­munities. To clarify the differences, the views are summarized next to the  
corresponding and opposing major findings of this book below. (The bases for  
Chapter I these findings are presented in the next section.)  
1. Past Capital Cost Increases  
The Conventional View: Infla­tion and regulation affected  
nuclear and coal capital costs  
approximately equally during  
the 1970s. Any difference be­tween nuclear and coal cost in­crease rates is solely attribut­able to the lack of sulfur dioxide  
"scrubbers" on some recent  
coal plants.  
Findings Of This Book: Nuclear capital  
costs increased over twice as fast as coal  
capital costs, in "real" (inflation­adjusted) terms, between 1971 and  
1978. The real increases averaged 142%  
for nuclear plants ( 13.5% per year); 68%  
for coal plants including the cost of  
scrubbers (7. 7%/year); and 33% for coal  
plants if scrubbers are excluded (4.2%/  
year); all figures are in addition to con­struction-sector inflation.  
2. Relative Capital Costs Of Recently Completed Plants  
The Conventional View: Re­cently completed reactors did  
not cost substantially more to  
construct than equivalent coal­fired plants with scrubbers.  
Findings OfThis Book: Because nuclear  
capital costs increased much more rapid­ly than coal plant costs in the 1970s, the  
average excess of nuclear capital costs  
over coal plant costs increased from 6%  
for 1971 completions to 52% for 1978  
completions. The latter figure assumes  
that 1978 coal plants have scrubbers;  
without coal plant scrubbers, the aver­age excess of nuclear over coal capital  
costs for 1978 completions is 91%.  
3. Canses Of Capital Cost Increases  
The Conventional View: a) Cap­ital costs increased because  
Congress and regulatory agen­cies, under pressure from envir­onmentalists and nuclear power  
opponents, imposed excessive,  
burdensome safety and environ­mental requirements.  
b) In addition, construction de­2  
Findings Of This Book: a) Capital costs  
increased in real terms in both the nu­clear and coal sectors primarily because  
of efforts to prevent total accident and  
environmental risks from expanding in  
proportion to the growth of either sector.  
These efforts involved major design  
changes to contain nuclear accident  
hazards and substantial equipment im­Chapter l lays caused by licensing inter­ventions and protests drove up  
costs, especially for nuclear  
plants.  
provements to reduce emiSSions from  
coal-burning. Nuclear power, technical­ly less mature and more prone to cata­strophic accidents than coal combustion,  
was especially susceptible to design  
changes to correct safety problems re­vealed through operating experience.  
b) Licensing interventions and protests  
appear to have contributed to past cost  
increases only when costs are expressed  
in "current" (inflated) dollars. When  
costs are measured in real terms (ad just­ed for inflation), plants which took long­er to license did not have higher costs  
than other plants built at the same time.  
4. Future Nuclear Capital Cost Increases  
The Conventional View: a)  
Nuclear power is now techni­cally mature in most respects,  
as evidenced by its excellent  
safety record to date. Current  
designs and equipment do not  
require significant modifica­tion, and therefore future  
nuclear plants will not cost sig­nificantly more to build, in real  
terms, than recently completed  
reactors.  
b) The "bottom line" of the  
Three Mile Island (TMI) acci­dent-no identifiable deaths or  
injuries despite multiple design  
defects, equipment failures,  
and operator errors - demon­strated that reactors are funda­mentally safe. The future of  
nuclear power is imperiled,  
however, by "licensing insta­bility"(i.e. continually chang­ing regulatory standards) and  
the lack of a commitment to  
Chapter I  
Findings Of This Book: a) The capital  
costs of nuclear plants will probably in­crease in the 1980s by an amount equal  
to the increase in the 1970s on a dollar­per-kilowatt (kW), inflation-adjusted  
basis (although the increases will be  
smaller in percentage terms). Increases  
will be required to implement regulatory  
design requirements promulgated too  
late to affect recently completed plants.  
to correct the many outstanding "unre­solved safety issues," and to address  
new safety problems that are still being  
detected at record rates through operat­ing experience.  
b) The TMI accident has added greatly to  
upward pressures on costs by discredit­ing fundamental regulatory premises  
and demonstrating the need for major  
design changes and new safety features,  
thus effectively eliminating the possibil­ity of regulatory stability.  
3 nuclear generation by the Nu­clear Regulatory Commission  
(NRC).  
5. Future Coal Capital Cost Increases  
The Convemional View: Coal­fired plants are only now begin­ning to climb the "regulatory  
hump" that drove up nuclear  
construction costs in the 1970s.  
Scrubbers and other advanced  
emission control equipment  
will affect the costs of coal  
plants more than new safety re­quirements will affect nuclear  
costs in the 1980s. According­ly. the capital costs of new re­actors will exceed those of new  
coal plants by no more than  
30%, and probably by less.  
Findings Of This Book: Emission rates  
of "criteria pollutants"-sulfur diox­ide, nitrogen oxides, and particulates,  
from coal plants completed in 1978 aver­age two-thirds less than those from 1971  
plants and are no greater, on average,  
than those from typical oil-fired power  
plants. Nevertheless, new coal plants  
will incur some further cost increases to  
meet new, more stringent standards. For  
approximately the same real increase in  
per-kilowatt costs as that experienced in  
the 1970s, it will be possible to reduce  
emissions from new coal plants to one­third of the new Environmental Protec­tion Agency (EPA) standards for new  
plants, nine-tenths less than emissions  
from coal plants completed in 197 I .  
Coal plants meeting these targets would  
be cleaner than oil-fired plants burning  
very low-sulfur oil. Assuming that these  
costs are incurred, and even discounting  
most of the impact of TMI, the average  
capital cost of nuclear plants completed  
in the late 1980s is still likely to be 75%  
higher than that of equivalent coal  
plants.  
6. Total Generating Costs  
The Conventional View: Be­cause new nuclear plants will  
cost, at worst, only 30% more  
to build than new coal plants,  
will operate at 65-75% "capac­ity factors" (performance relia­4  
Findings Of This Boak: Because the  
capital costs of new nuclear plants will  
exceed those of new coal plants by a  
wide margin (an estimated 75%), the  
lifetime generating costs of new nuclear  
plants will exceed those of new coal  
Chapter I bility), and will have relatively  
low fuel costs, their total gener­ating costs will equal or slightly  
undercut those of new coal  
plants on a national-average  
basis.  
plants by 20-25%, on average, even  
assuming:  
• an improvement in the capacity fac­tors of large reactors to 60% from the  
historical 54% average;  
• coal plants cleaner than plants burn­ing low-sulfur oil (as described in 5,  
above;  
• real escalation of 2-2\12% per year in  
coal fuel prices over the next 40 years  
to pay for reducing the health, safety.  
and environmental costs of coal­mining;  
• decommissioning and disposal of  
radioactive wastes accounting for  
only 8% of total nuclear costs;  
• little or no incorporation of the effect  
of the TMI accident in nuclear cost  
calculations.  
Plausible estimates of the impact of TMI  
on nuclear capital costs, capacity fac­tors, and financing problems raise the  
likely average excess of nuclear generat­ing costs vis-a-vis coal for future plants  
to the 35-50% range. This suggests that  
many reactors under construction could  
be scrapped in favor of new coal-fired  
plants with advanced emission controls  
with little or no economic penalty.  
The conventional view portrayed above is no caricature. Dozens of  
capital cost projections are currently being circulated by federal energy offi­cials, electric utilities, architect-engineers, power plant manufacturers, and  
"policy establishment" research groups. None forecasts that nuclear capital  
costs will exceed those of coal by more than 35%, and most put the difference  
between 10% and 25%." (Several particularly prominent projections, by the  
a. Most of these projections employ ·'net capability'· ratings to measure the generating  
capacity of coal-fired plants. whereas this study uses higher "generator nameplate" ratings for  
both internal consistency and compatibility with the author's past measurements of coal capacity  
factors. 1 The average 4-5% difference between the two measures accounts for only a small  
fraction of the 40·60% gap in respective projections of the difference between nuclear and coal  
capital costs. It is offset in any case by the resultant lower capacity factors used to calculate total  
coal~electric generating costs here.  
Chapter I 5 Department of Energy, the CONAES panel of the National Academy of  
Sciences, and Commonwealth Edison of Chicago, among others, are cited in  
Chapter 2.)  
Capital costs will account for two-thirds of the lifetime generating costs  
of future reactors and one-third for new coal plants.b The assumption that  
future nuclear and coal capital costs will differ only modestly is therefore  
crucial to arguments for nuclear power's economic superiority over coal­generated electricity. And indeed, every organization within the institutional  
groupings referred to above projects that new nuclear plants will be more  
economical, on average, than new coal facilities.  
The Three Mile Island nuclear accident has not significantly changed  
these forecasts. Bechtel, the world's largest reactor builder, predicted before  
the accident in early 1979 that nuclear capital costs would be 21% greater than  
coal costs; it now projects only a 25% difference. 2 Similarly, Westinghouse  
stated in late 1979, six months after the accident, that nuclear power had  
attained "regulatory maturity" and was no longer vulnerable to significant  
cost escalation, whereas coal was now commencing its passage through reg­ulatory turbulence. 3 These judgments are voiced even by most utilities that are  
cancelling reactors. They customarily cite nuclear power's "financing uncer­tainty" or its "regulatory instability." Rarely, if ever, do they note its  
probable high cost relative to coal. 4  
Section 1.2: Basis Of This Study's Findings  
What, then, is the basis for this study's sharp divergence from the  
mainstream?  
Statistical Analysis: Most importantly, the study's conclusions regard­ing capital cost increase rates in the 1970s and relative costs of recently  
completed plants arise from a comprehensive statistical analysis of actual  
nuclear and coal capital cost experience. Only two statistical investigations of  
capital costs have been published previously, and although much Jess com­prehensive than the present study, both were supportive of the conclusions  
reached here. Strikingly, no nuclear power proponent has published a com­prehensive statistical analysis to support the claim that nuclear and coal capital  
costs differ by only a small margin.  
The data base used here is sufficiently up-to-date to reflect the impact of  
most current regulations. The nuclear plant sample comprises all reactors  
completed on a commercial basis following the vendor-subsidized "turnkey"  
era and before the accident at Three Mile Island: 46 units completed from  
b. The importance of capital costs to nuclear generating costs is magnified by the lower  
capacity factor and higher fixed charge rate assumed for nuclear plants (see Chapter 12).  
6 Chapter I December 31, 1971 through December 31, 1978. The coal plant sample  
encompasses all 116 coal-fired plants above I 00 megawatts (MW) capacity  
completed from January I, 1972 through December 31, 1977, including 15  
plants with costly sulfur dioxide scrubbers. (These data were extrapolated  
through 1978 for comparability with the nuclear data, as explained in Section  
2.3).  
The statistical analysis corrects for inflation in construction labor and  
materials and employs synthesized "standard" plants to ensure that nuclear  
and coal costs are compared on an equal footing, in constant dollars and  
without geographical bias. For the first time, then, we have a definitive  
measurement of nuclear and coal capital cost increases in the 1970s. It reveals  
that nuclear plant capital costs grew more than twice as rapidly as those of coal  
plants during the past decade and are today one-and-a-half to two times as great  
as coal plant costs (with and without scrubbers, respectively). This confirms  
the findings of Bupp's 1974 nuclear and coal analysis and Mooz's 1978-79  
nuclear studies, 5 neither of which measured recent rates of cost increase for  
coal plants.  
In contrast, the one attempt by supporters of nuclear power purporting to  
compare actual nuclear and coal generating costs-the annual cost surveys by  
the Atomic Industrial Forum (AIF)-not only lumped new plants together with  
less costly older plants and made no adjustment for inflation, but also used  
extremely unrepresentative samples. The two most recent AIF surveys ex­cluded 12 of the 14 reactors with the highest capital costs as well as a majority  
of reactors suffering the longest shutdowns. The surveys also covered only  
15% of total U.S. coal-tired generation, excluding, for example, two giant  
coal-burning utilities which together generated more power from coal, at 19%  
lower cost, than all the coal plants included in the surveys. 6  
Analysis Of Design Changes: This study has developed the most com­plete picture to date of the design and construction changes that have brought.  
about the increases in capital costs. It demonstrates that nine-tenths of the real  
(inflation-adjusted) capital cost increases in coal plants in the 1970s was  
attributable to new equipment to reduce environmental pollution: sulfur di­oxide scrubbers, particulate control upgradings, and miscellaneous improve­ments ranging from ash disposal to noise abatement.  
No such itemization of cost increases was possible for nuclear plants due  
to their considerable engineering variability and the pervasive interconnec­tions among internal plant systems affected by design changes. The com­prehensive account of nuclear design and construction changes developed in  
Chapter 4 strongly suggests, however, that design and equipment changes to  
reduce the hazards of nuclear power generation underlay most of the real past  
increases in nuclear costs.  
Analysis Of Regulatory Changes: This study examines currently out­Chapter I 7 standing environmental and safety issues whose resolution will further in­crease the costs of nuclear and coal plants. It establishes that future coal plants  
should be able to reduce emissions of sulfur dioxide, particulates, and oxides  
of nitrogen to less than one-fourth of the average emissions from coal plants  
completed in 1978, which in turn are almost two-thirds less than 1971-plant  
emissions. This will require approximately the same increase in real per­kilowatt costs as that experienced during 1971-78 (this conclusion assigns the  
cost of "first-generation" scrubbers to 1978 plants).  
The costs of future nuclear safety improvements could not be itemized,  
because of the reasons given above and also because some improvements will  
probably be required to remedy defects that will be revealed through future  
operating experience and licensing reviews. Nevertheless, Chapters 5 and 6  
demonstrate that implementing existing requirements, disposing of "unre­solved safety issues," and rehabilitating nuclear power regulation in the wake  
of the Three Mile Island accident will prevent design stabilization and cause  
large new cost increases.  
Development Of A Statistical Model Of Capital Costs: The statistical  
analysis of past cost increases and consideration of the impetus behind new  
safety and environmental requirements together suggest a new approach for  
estimating future cost increases for nuclear plants. The power industry's cost  
projection method, engineering estimation, is applicable only to coal plants,  
for which regulatory changes are reasonably predictable and are confined to  
specific plant systems. It has failed for over a decade to predict nuclear costs  
reliably, and for good reason: the accurate itemization of construction labor,  
materials, and equipment which engineering estimation requires is impossible  
when continual engineering and regulatory changes cause ''as-built'' plants to  
differ radically from the original conceptual designs upon which the intemiza­tions are based.  
Instead, in this study future nuclear costs are projected from the hypothe­sis that real increases in nuclear capital costs occur more or less in concert with  
expansion of the nuclear generating sector. This "sector-size" hypothesis is  
supported by a detailed review of the development of nuclear tegulatory  
requirements (Chapter 3). This review shows that expansion of the nuclear  
sector created the conditions for the past increases in regulatory standards­increases which, in turn, were responsible for most of the past rise in real  
reactor costs. The sector-size hypothesis is also supported by the statistical  
analysis of past nuclear costs: using nuclear sector size as a proxy for regula­tory change, the analysis obtained an extraordinarily high "goodness of  
fit"-a 92% correlation between projected and actual costs. This exceeds not  
only that in Bupp's or Mooz's analyses but also the fit obtained when time  
rather than sector size is used to represent the increase in safety standards.c Fi­c. The calculations of !971-78 nuclear and coal plant cost increases do not depend upon  
8 Chapter l nally, use of the sector size hypothesis to project nuclear costs is supported by  
the coal cost analysis: future coal capital costs projected by extrapolating the  
past, observed relationship between coal plant costs and coal sector size  
coincide with the projections derived through engineering estimates of the  
costs of advanced new control equipment required to meet anticipated more  
stringent environmental standards.  
To be sure, the sector-size model does not replicate the c.omplete array of  
forces leading to new standards and higher costs for nuclear plants. It does not  
explicitly reflect: regulatory lag between detection and correction of safety  
problems; oil price .rises that .appear to make alternative energy sources more  
vulnerable to regulatory action; or the singular ili)pact of Three Mile Island,  
which will almost certainly swell the already considerable tendency of reactor  
operating experience to add to nuclear costs. Nevertheless, the model cap­tures, more successfully than prior explanations, the processes that brought  
forth costly regulatory requirements during nuclear power's expansion in the  
I 970s. Thus it provides the best existing tool for estimating future nuclear  
capital costs so long as the nuclear sector continues to grow. It is certainly  
superior to engineering estimation, which is inherently unsuited to nuclear  
power's dynamic regulatory situation.  
Moreover, the sector-size model's projection t))at nuclear plants under­taken today will cost approximately 75% more to construct than comparable  
coal-fired plants represents a modest extrapolation of cost experience in the  
1970s. The implied 1978-88 increase in the ratio of nuclear to coal capital costs  
is 16%; between 1971 and 1978, the actual, measured increase in the cost ratio  
was 43%. In order to fulfill the conventional forecasts by nuclear power  
advocates of a 10-25% differential between future nuclear and coal capital  
costs, nuclear construction costs would have to fall by 20-30% relative to those  
of coaL No credible evidence has been offered to support this highly improb­able reversal of past experience.  
Analysis Of Other Cost Factors: Finally, cost factors other than capital  
costs that will affect total plant generating costs-capacity factors, fuel costs,  
operating and maintenance costs, and financing charges-were projected here  
on the basis of careful study of empirical data. Moreover, considerable con­servatism (assumptions favorable to nuclear power) was built into the projec­tion of most cost factors, as can be seen from examining the assumed values of  
two especially significant variables: nuclear capacity factor and coal fuel cost.  
Because nuclear plants are very expensive to build but relatively in­expensive to operate, their generating costs are sensitive to their on-line  
performance rate, or capacity factor. Future nuclear plants, which will all  
exceed 800 megawatts capacity and will average I 150 MW, are assumed here  
the sector size formulation. Statistical models employing the date of construction start yield  
comparable results.  
Chapter 1 9 to generate at 60% capacity factors over their 30-year life. A lower projection  
could easily be justified on the basis of actual experience. Nuclear plants over  
800 MW capacity now account for almost two-thirds of commercial reactors  
and well over half of commercial reactor operating experience, but they have  
averaged only 54% capacity factor to date, and only 55.3% in the five years  
since the author published his projection of 55% performance. 7 Projections of  
65-75% capacity factors by nuclear power advocates-the same institutions  
that formerly anticipated 75-80% performance and derided the author's 55%  
projection8-assume that reactors will "mature" at rates far exceeding the  
very modest improvements evident in actual experience.  
Coal-electric generating costs are particularly sensitive to fuel costs. A  
mere 1% deviation from the assumed annual rate of real escalation in the  
delivered cost of coal translates into an approximate 10% difference in the total  
lifetime generating cost of a new coal-fired power plant. For purposes of  
projecting total generating costs in this study, it was assumed that the annual  
rate of increase from the actual 1979 average cost of mining and transporting  
coal would be 2.3% greater than the average in fiat ion rate for other industrial  
commodities over the next 40 years. This would duplicate coal's real rate of  
cost increase during 1974-79, a period marked by large increases in coal  
mining, chronic labor-management strife, and significant investment and  
operating expenditures to adapt to new health, safety, and environmental  
requirements. These factors will undoubtedly cause costs to increase in the  
future, but probably at diminishing rates, as evidenced by the real declines in  
the average cost of coal delivered to utilities in both 1979 and 1980. (The 1980  
decline was ignored in projecting costs here; including it in the post-1974  
increase rate used for extrapolation would have reduced projected average coal  
generating costs by 6%, as discussed in Section 11.3.) Indeed, the future cost  
of coal projected here is greater than that assumed by most nuclear proponents  
(see Table 11.3).  
Section 1.3: Scope Of This Book  
This study has deliberately been limited to the capital costs, and, to a  
lesser extent, the total generating costs, of new nuclear and coal-fired power  
plants. Other important issues in nuclear and coal economics are not addressed  
here, including:  
10  
• costs and extent of alternatives to central-station power genera­tion, including improved end-use efficiency, renewable energy  
sources, and cogeneration;  
• costs of retrofitting emission control systems and accident-pre­vention or mitigation equipment onto existing coal and nuclear  
plants;  
Chapter I • past and present subsidization of nuclear and coal electrical  
generation through government research and development, tax  
and depreciation allowances, and federal assumption of indirect  
fuel-cycle costs such as black lung compensation, "orphan"  
strip mines and mill tailings, uranium enrichment, etc.  
The estimates developed here of the direct costs to electric utilities of  
investments in new nuclear and coal-fired plants provide benchmarks for  
assessing these issues, however. The author particularly hopes that these  
estimates will improve the rigor of cost comparisons of electricity supply with  
alternative, non-central-station technologies for providing energy services,  
such as end-use efficiency improvements.  
Similarly, this study has not attempted to recommend whether public  
policy should favor coal-fired power plants over nuclear facilities under con­struction or being planned. Such a detertnination requires consideration of  
many critical factors that elude expression in a simple per-kWh formulation of  
generating costs and are outside the scope of this book. They include: the  
health, safety, and environmental effects of nuclear and coal generation; the  
contribution of fossil-fuel burning to the build-up of carbon dioxide in the  
atmosphere; the linkage between nuclear power growth in the United States  
and the. development of nuclear weapons technology here and abroad; and the  
comparative employment, social, and political implications of energy growth  
in the form of central-station power supplies vis-a-vis growth through im­proved efficiency of energy use and development of renewable resources.  
The study has found that future coal-fired plants can be expected to  
generate electricity at considerably less cost than future nuclear plants, al­though both types of plants will be much more expensive, in real terms, than  
their counterparts today. This finding applies throughout the United States, as  
Chapter 12 shows. Nevertheless, readers should adapt the generic approach of  
the study to local conditions, as appropriate. This is true particularly for the  
projected cost of coal fuel, which varies considerably among regions. Con­versely, where utilities project that new nuclear plants will cost much less than  
estimated here, readers are urged to examine the extent to which those projec­tions require, contrary to the evidence presented in Chapters 5 and 6, that  
nuclear regulatory requirements more or less stabilize in the future.  
Although the analysis presented here implies that many reactors in early  
construction could probably be abandoned and replaced by new coal facilities  
with little or no economic penalty, the book does not attempt to assess the  
impact of such substitutions on electricity supply or coal markets. These  
effects of nuclear cancellations are largely outside the scope of this study and  
merit further assessment, although data developed here, such as construction  
durations of nuclear and coal plants, are relevant to such analysesd  
d. The effect on air quality of replacing planned nuclear capacity would also be of  
Chapter I II Finally, the issues addressed here could be explored profitably in greater  
detail, and the data and analysis extended and revised as events change and  
new perceptions emerge. The statistical correlations can be updated and  
refined as more plants are completed and new causal hypotheses are advanced.  
The costs of recent design and regulatory changes will become more apparent  
as time passes, and prospective further changes will come into sharper focus.  
The underlying processes that give rise to increased regulatory requirements  
particularly deserve greater study. 9 Projections of other relevant cost factors,  
such as capacity factors, fuel costs, and reactor decommissioning, need con­tinual checking against actual experience.  
The author has endeavored throughout to state all his methods and  
assumptions, to express costs in constant dollars for comparability with other  
estimates, and, most importantly, to project future trends on the basis of hard,  
empirical evidence. Future efforts by others should do the same.  
References  
I. C. Komanoff, Power Plant Performance (Council on Economic Priorities. New York,  
NY, 1976).  
2. W.K. Davis, Vice President, Bechtel Power Corp .. "Statement on U.S. Nuclear  
Power Program" before the Select Committee on Energy of the U.K. House of Commons. 4 June  
1980. The 25% capital cost difference is inferred from his Table 7, unescalated levelized costs.  
fixed charges, 1980dollars, 1.41 ¢/kWh for nuclear and I. 13¢/kWh for coal (high- and low-sulfur  
average with scrubber). The prior21% difference is in W.K. Davis and R.O. Sandberg. "Light  
Water Reactors: Economics and Prospects" (February 1979). Table 6. 1.24¢/kWh nuclear and  
1.025¢/kWh coal, same basis as above except 1979 dollars. Davis also estimates (I 980. p, 9) that  
the TMI accident will add 5% to nuclear capital costs.  
3. LG, Hauser, Manager. Energy-Systems Applications. Westinghouse Power Systems  
Co., "Generation Planning: Considerthe Cycles-II," in Electrical World, 192 (No. II), 20-22  
(I December 1979).  
4. For a recent example, see MacNeil/Lehrer Report, "The Nuclear Marketplace." aired  
25 November 1980 (transcript available through Public Broadcasting System). Four authorities  
were interviewed concerning cancellation of a nuclear plant order by Virginia Electric & Power  
(VEPCO): executives ofVEPCO, Commonwealth Edison, and the Atomic Industrial Forum, and  
a leading investment broker. All insisted that new nuclear plants would be cheaper than coal  
plants in the long run, provided they could be licensed.  
5. Bupp's and Mooz's studies are discussed and referenced in Section 2.2.  
6. C. Komanoff, Power Propaganda (Environmental Action Foundation. Washington.  
DC, 1980). The two coal-burning utilities noted in text are the Tennessee Valley Authority and  
American Electric Power. This report analyzed AIF's survey of 1978 costs. The author subse­concern. A calculation in Section 7 .3, however, indicates that replacement of all planned reactors  
less than 40% complete-65 ,000 MW of capacity-by new coal plants meeting the stringent  
emission rates assumed here for 1988 plants. would add surprisingly little to total nationwide  
emissions: approximately l% to sulfur dioxide. 3-4% to nitrogen oxides. and .2% to particulates.  
12 Chapter I quently discovered that AIF's 1977 survey too omitted 12 of the 14 costliest reactors and the same  
two coal-burning utilities. The AIF 1977 and 1978 survey results were reported in many  
prestigious publications, including The New York Times on 8 April 1979 (Section 3) and 30  
December 1979 (Section 4); The Wall Street Journal on 24 April 1979; and Science at 204, 596  
(II May 1979) and 207, 724 (15 February 1980). In some instancesthe results were attributed to  
the Edison Electric Institute, which also circulates the AIF figures. As of this writing, AIF has not  
issued a survey for 1979 or 1980.  
7. The 54% figure extends through June 1980 and is in C. Komanoff, Bulletin of the  
Atomic Scientists,}6 (No. 9), 51-54 (November 1980). The 55.3% figure is author's calculation  
covering l976through October 1980. The 55% performance projection is in Reference I, p. 8.  
8. See C. Komanoff and N.A. Boxer, Nuclear Plant Performance Update (Council on  
Economic Priorities, New York, NY 1977), Appendix D, for citations of critiques of Reference I  
by the Atomic Industrial Forum, the U.S. Energy Research and Development Administration  
(now Department of Energy), and Commonwealth Edison, and rebuttals thereto. Other critiques  
were subsequently published by the Edison Electric Institute and Oak Ridge National Laboratory.  
9. D. Okrent, Nuclear Reactor Safety: On The History Of The Regulatory Process  
(University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI. 1981 ), a major study of nuclear regulation by a  
long-time member of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's Advisory Committee on Reactor  
Safeguards, arrived as this book was going to press.  
Chapter I 13 2  
Summary:  
Cost Escalation  
At Nuclear And  
Coal Power Plants  
Efforts to contain the societal costs of electricity generation from coal  
and nuclear power have grown as the coal and nuclear generating sectors have  
expanded. Measures to limit coal-generated pollution and to reduce nuclear  
accident hazards added significantly to the costs of building power plants in  
the United States during the 1970s. These measures have had a far greater  
effect on nuclear plants, causing the average ratio of nuclear to coal capital  
(construction) costs to increase from roughly 1.05 in 1971 to over 1.5 in 1978.  
If past relationships between sector expansion and regulatory stringency  
continue, by the late 1980s nuclear plants will cost at least 75% more to build  
than will coal plants incorporating advanced emission controls; nuclear gen­erating costs would then significantly exceed those of coal.  
Section 2.1: Introduction  
Over the lifetime of new electric-generating plants, capital costs will  
account for approximately two-thirds of total generating costs for nuclear and  
one-third for coal plants. Accordingly, capital costs are central to the relative  
economics of new nuclear and coal plants. They also strongly affect the  
competitiveness of both nuclear and coal plants with cogeneration, renewable  
energy sources, and improved end-use efficiency - a critical issue, but  
beyond the scope of this book.  
The capital costs of the first nuclear plants completed on a commercial  
basis in the early 1970s were only slightly greater than those of contemporane­ous coal plants, but costs for both plant types have increased rapidly since then.  
Although inflation in construction wages and material prices has been a major  
contributory factor, increased environmental and safety standards have played  
14 Chapter2 a particularly important role.  
Most representatives of the power industry, the federal government, and  
the technical and policy communities have argued that future environmental  
and safety standards will affect nuclear and coal plants equally and will not  
cause major differences in capital costs. Of 12 predicted nuclear-coal capital  
cost ratios cited in the 1977 Ford-Mitre report on nuclear power, the highest  
was only 1.23. 1 Commonwealth Edison of Chicago, the nation's largest  
nuclear utility, believes that its new nuclear plants will cost only 8% more to  
build than coal plants. 2 The federal Department of Energy (DOE) projects an  
18% difference, 3 and the Committee on Nuclear and Alternative Energy  
Systems of the National Academy of Sciences projects the difference to be in  
the 0-25% range. 4  
If these forecasts were accurate, new nuclear plants, which will cost less  
to operate than new coal units, would probably have slightly lower life-cycle  
generating costs. Such forecasts underlie the present plans of U.S. utilities to  
almost triple nuclear generating capacity by I 990 from the 54 gigawatts (GW)  
operating in early 1981 , and they suggest that new orders will be forthcoming  
when the current surplus of generating capacity is used up.  
The projections of nearly equal future nuclear and coal capital costs are,  
however, belied by experience: the average ratio of nuclear to coal capital costs  
of plants completed in the late 1970s, after adjustment to eliminate the effects  
of inflation and add the costs of sulfur dioxide scrubbers to coal plants, was  
more than I .5 to !. Moreover, the ratio increased steadily throughout the  
I 970s, and an examination of the impetus behind new regulatory standards  
suggests that the trend toward higher nuclear capital costs relative to coal will  
continue for some time.  
Section 2.2: Prior Capital Cost Analyses  
Virtually all nuclear plants completed in the 1970s cost much more to  
construct than originally estimated by reactor manufacturers and electric  
utilities, even after adjusting for the effects of inflation. 5 The failure to predict  
accurately nuclear capital costs reflects a fundamental limitation in the power  
industry's technique of engineering estimation, which employs conceptual  
plant designs to calculate the labor, materials, equipment, and engineering  
effort needed to build a plant. The technique requires that the scope of work be  
known at the start of construction, yet nuclear plants, as the largest reactor  
builder has noted, are subject to "new requirements ... imposed after the  
design and construction are well advanced, requiring substantial rework that  
increases both schedule and cost.' ' 
6 The 1979 nuclear accident at Three Mile  
Island (TMI), moreover, has provoked a thorough and still-continuing re­appraisal of nuclear regulation that promises to produce many new, more  
stringent standards.  
Chapter2 15 Only two major empirical studies of nuclear capital costs were published  
in the 1970s, neither by the power industry. Both demonstrated that nuclear  
costs to date were increasing rapidly over time (after adjusting for inflation)  
and, thus, cast doubt upon engineering estimates which anticipate little or no  
future real increases in capital costs. But neither study can be used to project  
future relative coal and nuclear costs. Bupp et al. 7 found far higher rates of  
cost increase for nuclear than for coal plants, but their data base is now six  
years old and includes no scrubbers for coal plants, which some claim have  
offset increases in nuclear costs. Mooz's more recent analyses8 of nuclear  
costs employed more explanatory variables and a larger data base, but the  
absence of a coal plant analysis precluded comparison of escalation rates.  
Moreover, both Bupp and Mooz attributed all nuclear cost increases not  
accounted for by construction inflation to the passage of time, assuming that  
costs increase linearly (by a constant amount) with calendar year. Their models  
contained no explanatory variables that would allow one to predict whether the  
cost increases would continue at past rates, accelerate, or diminish. The  
authors implicitly recognized this limitation by stating that they did not believe  
their analyses had predictive value.  
This book extends Bupp's and Mooz's work in three major respects:  
• It uses a larger, more current data base for both coal and nuclear  
plants, one which reflects the impacts of scrubbers and other  
recent changes in regulatory standards. Accordingly, it provides  
a comprehensive, up-to-date view of power plant cost exper­ience during the 1970s and permits calculation of nuclear and  
coal capital costs based on 1978 regulatory standards and con­struction costs.  
• It analyzes the changes in plant design requirements and con­struction conditions that accounted for most of the "real" (infla­tion-adjusted) cost increases in the 1970s and those that will  
probably cause further increases in the 1980s. The analysis is  
particularly useful in estimating the costs of future coal-fired  
plants with advanced pollution controls. It also demonstrates  
that many unresolved nuclear safety issues will make it difficult  
to stabilize plant designs.  
• It formulates an hypothesis to explain the underlying factors that  
caused coal and nuclear regulatory standards, and hence costs,  
to increase in the 1970s. The hypothesis is developed in con­siderable detail for nuclear plants and is used to generate a  
first-order projection of future nuclear capital costs.  
Section 2.3: Cost Increases, 1971-1978  
To measure past increases in capital costs, a cost data base was compiled  
16 Chapter2 for all U.S. nuclear and coal units greater than I 00 megawatts (MW) capacity  
that achieved commercial operation from December 31. 1971 to December 31,  
1977 (for coal) and to December 31, 1978 (for nuclear). 3 It includes all reactors  
constructed on a commercial basis through the end of 1978: 46 units totaling  
39,265 MW capacity, ranging from 514 to 1130 MW each. The 116 coal units  
total70,509 MW (ll4-1300MW).  
Capital cost data were obtained from utility records published by the  
federal Energy Information Administration, as described in Chapters 8 and 9.  
Costs are expressed there in "mixed current dollars," i.e .. as the sum of all  
dollars expended in the different years of construction, including interest  
during construction (IDC) paid by the utility on capital borrowed during  
construction. To control for widely varying rates of inflation and interest  
during the sample period, costs were converted to I 979 dollars without IDC,  
using the Handy-Whitman Index of Public Utility Construction Costs, a semi­annual compilation of wages, material prices, and other factor costs in steam­electric plant construction (see Appendix 3).9 This converts all costs to com­parable "steam-plant construction dollars," permitting isolation of cost in­creases caused by changes in the characteristics of plants- a major focus of  
this analysis.  
Even with costs expressed in constant 1979 steam-plant dollars, the  
nuclear and coal samples are not fully comparable because of differences in a  
variety of variables. Therefore, multiple regression analyses were employed  
to control for the effects of unit size, construction of multiple units, geographi­cal location, use of cooling towers and scrubbers, and the number of reactors  
built by the architect-engineer (A-E). Only variables with a statistical signifi­cance level of 95% or better were included, with one minor exception (see  
Section 9. I). The dependent variable - that is, the variable correlated with  
these factors- was capital cost-per-kilowatt of design capacity,b adjusted to  
constant steam-plant dollars as described above.  
After all adjustments, including that for inflation, capital costs were  
found to have increased persistently throughout the period of the study ( 1971- 
78). To allow for this phenomenon in the regression analysis, two alternative  
formulations were examined. In one model, capital costs were assumed to be  
related to time in addition to all the other variables; in the other model, they  
were assumed to be related to the size of the respective power-generating  
a. The data base excludes four reactors completed pursuant to fixed-fee contracts during  
1972-73. because some costs were absorbed by the vendors and did not appear in the utilities'  
costs. Inclusion of these units would increase the apparent nuclear cost increase rate computed  
below. 1978 coal data were not available for this study.  
b. Design capacity is maximum nameplate generator rating (coal) and original design  
electrical ratings prior ro their late·l976 revisions by the NRC (nuclear). These ratings are used in  
Chapter II to estimate capacity factors. See Sections 8. I and 9.1 for further discussion of  
capacity ratings.  
Chapter2 17 sector. Time was measured by the date each nuclear plant received its con­struction permit and each coal-fired boiler was ordered from a vendor. Sector  
size was defined as the megawatts of nuclear or coal capacity operating or  
being built on these same dates.  
Both formulations reflect the effect on costs of the upgrading of nuclear  
and coal regulatory standards over time. The formulation with sector size was  
devised because it appears to capture more of the societal processes that give  
rise to new standards, as discussed in Section 2.5 and Chapter 3. The calcu­lated costs of 1971 and 1978 plants are relatively independent of which  
formulation is employed, however. The choice of sector size or time is im­portant primarily for estimating future capital costs.  
The results of the regression analysis are described in detail in Chapters 8  
and 9. The models with sector size, shown in Tables 8.1 and 9.1, explain most  
of the variance in costs-92% for nuclear, and 68% for coal-considerably  
more than in Bupp's or Mooz's analyses.c Key findings are as follows:  
Time or Sector Size: Costs measured in the model employing calendar  
year grew by 24% per year for nuclear plants and by 6% annually for coal.  
Alternatively, costs were proportional to the .58 power of sector size for  
nuclear and the .61 power for coal, so that an approximately 50% real cost  
increase was associated with each nuclear or coal sectoral doubling. This is  
shown for nuclear plants in Figure 2. I . However, the coal sector was more than  
14 times as large as the nuclear sector in 1971, so its 75 OW expansion to 1978  
represents a far smaller percentage increase (53%) than the 46 OW increase for  
nuclear (467%); thus coal expansion was associated with a much smaller  
increase in capital costs.  
The rates of increase exclude mitigating effects such as greater architect­engineer experience (for nuclear) and exacerbating effects such as addition of  
scrubbers (for coal). Composite nuclear and coal cost increase rates that  
incorporate these effects are presented below.  
Unit Size: Nuclear per-kW costs were proportional to the -.20 power of  
unit size, i.e., declining 13% for each doubling in sized-a cost reduction less  
than half that projected by the power industry and the federal government. 10  
Coal plant costs were not affected by unit size, notwithstanding prevailing  
estimates of 10-15% cost reductions per size doubling. 11  
Multiple Units: Identical nuclear or coal units built consecutively at one  
c. the highest r' (goodness of fit) values in Bupp eta/. were 64% for nuclear and 43% for  
coaL Mooz reached 76% in his nuclear analysis.  
d. Incorporating the greater cost of interest during construction (adjusted for inflation}  
for larger reactors reduces the nuclear capital cost reduction per size doubling to 10%.  
18 Chapter2 "' 1  
8  
"' " ;::  
-5  
- 
1100  
900  
~ Iii 700  
]  
~  
0  
.t:  
"i  
~  
iii  
t; 500  
0  
0  
Figure 2.1  
Costs Of Nuclear Plants In The United States  
(nonnalized to typical plant characteristics and  
1979 construction price levels)  
•  
•  
• • •  
•  
•  
•  
• • • • • •  
• •  
•  
•  
Construction Permit Issue Date (by midpoint of year)  
1967 1968 1969 1970  
•  
• •  
•  
•  
1971  
300 ~------------------------------------------------------------------- 10 20 30 40 50 60  
Nuclear Capacity Operating or Under Construction, GW Ocoal  
• Nuclear  
Figure 2.2  
Power Plant Capital Costs  
(in 1979 steam-plant $/kW,  
with real interest during construction)  
1374  
Costs were synthesized by applying nuclear and coal cost regressions to ''standard  
plants" as described in text. Costs of 1971 and 1978 plants vary little with the  
regression model employed. 1978 and 1988 coal plants include scrubbers. See  
Table 2.1 for breakdown of costs of coal plant pollution controls. Real interest  
during construction (!DC) accounts for between 6% and 15% of total plant costs.  
See Table 10. I 0 for IDC's share of each plant's cost.  
site cost 10% less than other units, evidently because of shared planning and  
facilities as well as "learning" in design and construction!  
Architect-Engineer Experience: Nuclear costs declined by 7% for each  
e. The cost savings from building multiple units and the limited savings from building  
large units imply that. during the 1970s, large single plants could have been replaced by twin  
half-size units at no increase in capital costs (nuclear) and at a 10% savings (coal). These results  
do not reflect a further advantage of small units-their higher average generating perfonnance  
compared to large plants (see Sections II. I and II .2).  
20 Chapter2 Figure 2.3  
Power Plant Construction Durations  
(in years)  
Ocoal  
Nuclear  
8.1  
-YYe;a~r~~~~~~1971 1978 1988  
(projected)  
Durations are measured from construction permit award (nuclear) or boiler order  
(coal) to commercial service date. They were synthesized by applying nuclear and  
coal duration regressions to "standard plants" as described in text. Durations of  
1971 and 1978 plants vary little with the regression model employed.  
doubling in the number of plants constructed by an A-E, a relatively modest  
"learning" effect.  
Scrubbers: Systems for controlling sulfur dioxide added 26% to coal  
plant costs, or $120/kilowatt (kW) (in 1979 steam-plant dollars). 12  
Costs of Standard Plants: To measure the combined effects of the above  
cost factors during the 1970s, two sets of "standard plants" were defined, one  
representing those completed in late 1971, just prior to the start of the study  
period, and the second corresponding to the last plants in the sample, com­Chapter2 21 Table 2.1  
Pollution Control Costs For New Coal Plants  
(in mid-1979 steam-plant $/kW)  
Actual Projected  
Pollutant 1971 1978 1988  
Particulates 20 60 65-80  
so, 120 140-180  
NO, 10 60-90  
Solid Waste 0-5 5 30-45  
Other 45 65-75  
TOTAL 25-30 240 360-470  
INCREASE 210-215 120-230  
See Chapter 7 for derivation of costs. All costs are calculated using 1978 standard  
plant characteristics (Table 10.3) for consistency. Real interest during construc­tion accounts for 8% of total costs.  
pleted in late 1978. 13 Their characteristics, shown in Table 10.3, mirror the  
data base, except that geographical characteristics were merged to avoid  
regional bias. A scrubber was also specified for the 1978 standard coal plant  
(whereas about half of recent coal plants lack scrubbers, using low-sulfur coal  
instead to meet emission standards).  
Costs calculated for plants with these characteristics are shown in Figure  
2. 2. Approximately 6-l 0% of their costs are contributed by real interest during  
construction (Section !0.4), which is proportional to plant construction time  
and the real cost of money for utilities. 14 Typical construction periods for 1971  
and 1978 plants were calculated from separate regressions for construction  
duration; they increased from 41 
h to 5 years for coal and from 51h to 61h years  
for nuclear, as shown in Figure 2.3.  
Costs shown in Figure 2.2 are expressed in 1979 steam-plant dollars and  
thus appear greater than costs of most completed plants since the latter are  
reported in mixed-current dollars which reflect earlier, cheaper material prices  
and wage rates. From 1971 to 1978, the capital cost of the standard nuclear  
plant increased by !42% (13.5% annually) or $520/kW in 1979 steam-plant  
dollars. For coal plants, the typical 1971-78 real increase was 68% (7. 7%  
annually). or approximately $240/kW, of which scrubbers accounted for half.  
22 Chapter 2 Figure 2.4  
Emissions Of Criteria Air Pollutants  
By Typical New Coal Plants  
(pounds of pollutant per million Btu of coal burned)  
Original NSPS f>-"-"-"'""'l  
New 1978 plant !-<-.""""~  
See Chapter 7 for ba>is of estimates and comparison with oil-fired plants.  
Thus, the ratio of typical nuclear to coal capital costs increased from I .06  
in 1971 to I . 52 in 1978, assuming the addition of scrubbers to 1978 coal plants;  
without scrubbers, the 1978 ratio was I. 91. The 1978 cost ratio far exceeds the  
highest nuclear-coal capital cost ratio projected by industry and government  
for future plants. It indicates that recently completed nuclear plants may not  
show life-cycle cost advantages over comparable coal facilities. 15  
Section 2.4: Cost Increases And Regulatory Changes, 1971- 
1978  
Because the cost increase figures above are in addition to wage and  
Chapter 2 23 material inflation, they had to result from increases in the quantity of labor,  
materials, equipment, and engineering required to build power plants In tum,  
these increases were occasioned almost entirely by the application of more  
stringent environmental and safety standards to coal and nuclear plants.  
Coal: Most of the real (inflation-adjusted) increase in the cost to con­struct coal plants in the 1970s went for equipment to control the three major air  
pollutants produced in coal combustion: particulates, sulfur dioxide, and  
nitrogen oxides. The collection efficiencies of electrostatic precipitators were  
improved from the former 97% average to 99.5% to enable them to capture  
smaller particulates, adding an average of $40/kW to capital costs, as Table  
2. I shows. Installation of "first-generation" scrubbers that remove an aver­age of 75% of sulfur dioxide from the stack added an average of $120/kW. and  
boiler modifications reducing nitrogen oxide emissions by 35% added about  
$1 0/kW. In return for these expenditures, the typical 1978-completed coal  
plant produces 64% less "criteria pollutants" than a typical 1971 plant - 
surpassing the average 55% reduction required by the original New Source  
Performance Standards (NSPS) promulgated by the federal Environmental  
Protection Agency (Figure 2.4). The new coal plants are slightly cleaner than  
typical oil-burning plants, as discussed in Chapter 7.  
Other environmental improvements- better emission monitoring, safer  
disposal of waste ash, increased use of cooling towers, and abatement of  
construction pollution, liquid effluent, and noise - cost an average of $45/  
kW. All told, new equipment to reduce the environmental impact of coal plants  
absorbed 90% of the total increase in the real capital costs of coal plants during  
the 1970s. r  
Nuclear: The costs of increased regulatory standards cannot be itemized  
for nuclear plants as they were for coal. Changes in nuclear design or equip­ment requirements tend to cause indirect, site-specific changes in diverse  
supporting equipment that are hard to identify and even more difficult to  
quantify. But although cost estimates are not available for each specific  
change, nuclear design and construction changes in the 1970s were neverthe­less extensive and costly.  
One key indicator of regulatory standards, the number of Atomic Energy  
Commission (AEC) and Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) "regulatory  
guides" stipulating acceptable design and construction practices for reactor  
systems and equipment, grew almost seven-fold, from 21 at the end of 1971 to  
143 at the end of 1978. Professional engineering societies developed new  
nuclear standards at an even faster rate (often in anticipation of AEC/NRC  
f. The remaining I 0% is reasonably attributable ro the modest real increase in IDC caused  
by lengthened construction and higher real interest rates and to design and construction improve­ments to raise operating reliability.  
24 Chapter 2 regulations). 16 These led to more stringent (and costly) manufacturing, test­ing, and performance criteria for structural materials such as concrete and  
steel, and for basic components such as valves, pumps, and cables.  
Requirements such as these had a profound effect on nuclear plants  
during the 1970s. Major structures were strengthened and pipe restraints added  
to absorb seismic shocks and other postulated "loads" identified in accident  
analyses. Barriers were installed and distances increased to prevent fires,  
flooding, and other "common-mode" accidents from incapacitating both  
primary and back-up groups of vital equipment. Similar measures were taken  
to shield equipment from high-speed missile fragments that might be loosed  
from rotating machinery or from the pressure and fluid effects of possible pipe  
ruptures. Instrumentation, control, and power systems were expanded to  
monitor more plant factors under a broadened range of operating situations and  
to improve the reliability of safety systems. Components deemed important to  
safety were "qualified" to perform under more demanding conditions, requir­ing more rigorous fabrication, testing, and documentation of their manufac­turing history.  
Over the course of the 1970s, these changes approximately doubled the  
amounts of materials, equipment, and labor and tripled the design engineering  
effort required per unit of nuclear capacity, according to the Atomic Industrial  
Forum. 17 They also increased the real costs of many construction commodi­ties. Moreover, because many changes were mandated during construction­as new information relevant to safety emerged- much construction lacked a  
fixed scope and had to be let under cost-plus contracts that undercut efforts to  
economize. Completed work was sometimes modified or removed, often with  
a "ripple effect" on related systems. Construction sequences were frequently  
altered and schedules for equipment delivery were upset, contributing to poor  
labor productivity and hampering management efforts to improve construction  
efficiency. In general. reactors in the 1970s were built increasingly in an  
''environment of constant change'' 18 that precluded control or even estimation  
of costs and which magnified the direct cost impacts of new regulations and  
design changes.  
Section 2.5: The Impetus Behind New Regulatory  
Requirements  
The major force behind the real increase in power plant costs in the 1970s  
was the imposition of increasingly stringent regulatory requirements. The  
same will be true for the future. Thus if we can anticipate future regulatory  
trends, we can gain substantial insight into the probable future course of power  
plant costs.  
This is a fairly straightforward matter for coal: most new environmental  
regulations are reasonably predictable, and, since they affect specific plant  
Chapter2 25 systems, their costs are roughly quantifiable. Nuclear plants, however, present  
a major difficulty: many safety requirements that will affect future reactors  
have not yet been promulgated- indeed, some will be occasioned by prob­lems identified during future operating experience. Moreover, even the costs  
of those future requirements known today are not calculable on a generic basis  
since they frequently affect so many internal plant systems that their impact  
will vary both with plant design and the stage of construction.  
But, even if specific future nuclear regulatory standards and their costs  
cannot be determined in advance, prior experience may nevertheless provide a  
means of approximating their overall rate of application. Increased regulatory  
stringency appears to be closely related to expansion of the nuclear sector­the amount of nuclear capacity operating and under construction - and to  
increased reactor operating experience. This conclusion is suggested by the  
remarkably high (92%) "goodness of fit" (agreement between predicted and  
actual costs) attained when increases in nuclear costs in the 1970s are cor­related with increases in nuclear sector size (Section 2.3). It is also supported  
by an historical analysis. reported in Chapter 3 and summarized here, of  
growth in nuclear regulations.  
One factor motivating this growth has been regulators' desire to reduce  
the risks per reactor as the number of plants increases. As nuclear pioneer and  
proponent Alvin Weinberg wrote following the Three Mile Island accident in  
1979, '' [flor nuclear energy to grow in usefulness, the accident probability per  
reactor will simply have to diminish.'' 19 Otherwise, nuclear expansion could  
lead to such a high rate of accidents per year that the public's confidence in  
nuclear power would collapse and plants would be forced to close.  
Weinberg's prescription has many antecedents. The Advisory Commit­tee on Reactor Safeguards, an influential body of senior nuclear scientists  
attached to the AEC, wrote in recommending improved inspection of reactor  
vessels in 1965,  
[T]he orderly growth of the industry, with concomitant increase in the  
number, size. power level and proximity of nuclear power reactors to large  
population centers will, in the future, make desirable, even prudent,  
incorporating [stricter design standards] in many reactors. 20  
Similarly, AEC staff, in recommending backcup shutdown systems to prevent  
events in which the control rods fail to "scram" (shut down) the reactor during  
an accident (events known as Anticipated Transients Without Scram, or  
ATWS), wrote in 1973,  
26  
The present likelihood of a severe ATWS event is ... acceptably small. in  
view of the limited number of plants now in operation ... As more plants  
are built, however, the overall chance of ATWS will increase, and the staff  
believes that design improvements are appropriate to maintain and to  
Chapter2 improve further the safety margins provided for the protection of the  
public. 21  
A second factor contributing to new regulations is the public's increasing  
awareness of and concern about nuclear hazards. This has put pressure on  
elected officials and regulators to reduce nuclear risks in order to make nuclear  
expansion more acceptable to the public. Citizen interventions and protests  
have been blamed for increasing costs through delay, but most such increases  
were negligible in real (inflation-adjusted) terms for reactors completed in the  
1970s; delays caused by citizen challenges generally affected reactor lie<ms­ing, not construction, and reactors which took longer to license did not have  
inordinately high capital costs (seep. 205). Far more importantly, intervenors  
and expert critics have identified new safety concerns, such as emergency  
cooling criteria and cable separation, and have generally made the regulatory  
staff "considerably more cautious and conservative" 22 in licensing and rule­making hearings and in internal formulation of regulatory policy.  
New regulations also arise from detection of previously unrecognized  
reactor defects. Reviews of new plants by the reactor manufacturers and  
AEC/NRC have provided one such means of detection. For example, General  
Electric and Westinghouse discovered potentially large dynamic forces that  
could affect reactor containment structures and reactor vessel supports, re­spectively, in accident analyses performed for licensing reviews of new plants  
in the mid- I 970s. Other safety issues leading to new regulatory standards,  
including seismic and tornado protection, quality assurance problems, main  
steamline breaks, and intermingling of systems for reactor operation and  
shutdown, have been identified in reviewing individual reactor applications  
and have been applied subsequently to other plants.  
Even more importantly, many unanticipated safety problems have been  
revealed by operating experience. Contrary to early expectations, increased  
reactor operation has generally warranted widening rather than reducing de­sign margins. The "lack of perfection in design, construction and operation"  
of early reactors prompted the Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards to  
advocate use of more back-up safety systems. 23 Fuel leaks, pipe cracks, and  
malfunctioning components later formed what NRC called a "considerable  
body of operating reactor experience [indicating] the need for expanded tech­nical review in areas previously thought to be not sufficiently important to  
warrant much attention. " 24  
Adverse operating experience has also given rise to numerous regulatory  
guides and "unresolved safety issues." Major examples are the 1975 Browns  
Ferry fire, which led to costly new rules for fireproof construction and ventila­tion; reactor control breakdowns in 1978-80 due to power failures to instru­ments that have prompted consideration of increased separation of "safety"  
from "non-safety'! instruments (Section 5.4); and the 1979 TMI accident,  
which has sparked an across-the-board review of fundamental regulatory  
Chapter2 27 premises.  
The origins of nuclear regulatory standards are varied and complex, but  
the above discussion suggests that nuclear capacity growth and increased  
reactor operating experience have been the major causes of new requirements.  
Growth in the number of plants has engendered greater public concern over  
nuclear power hazards, has generated new licensing reviews in which safety  
problems were discovered and has forced regulators to endeavor to reduce  
per-plant risks to contain the industry-wide probability of a serious accident.  
Increased operating experience, similarly, has unearthed safety defects requir­ing remedial regulatory action. In addition, the enlarged regulatory effort  
required to oversee an expanding nuclear sector has necessitated greater  
documentation and standardization of regulatory requirements, generally at a  
more stringent level.  
Growth in size of the sector also underlay the rise in real costs of coal  
plants. Expansion of coal-fired generating capacity in the 1960s and 1970s  
aggravated that sector's environmental impact, both nationwide and in new  
regions previously without large-scale coal use, such as the Four Corners  
region in the Southwest. Public outcry over these potential impacts led to more  
stringent and costly pollution control requirements. Similarly, concern over  
acid rain, which is also a product of expanded electricity generation from coal  
(although disproportionately from earlier, poorly controlled plants), may  
cause coal emission control requirements to be tightened further.  
Section 2.6: Regulatory Standards And Capital Costs In The  
1980s  
The preceding discussion indicates that the real capital costs of new  
nuclear and coal plants will increase further (in addition to increases caused by  
general inflation) as regulatory standards become still more stringent in the  
future. New standards and their costs for typical plants assumed to be com­pleted in I 988 are investigated in Chapters 5-7 and are outlined below.  
Coal Standards and Costs: EPA has promulgated stricter New Source  
Performance Standards for coal plants ordered after September 1978 (Figure  
2.4). But for purposes of estimating !988 coal plant costs here, future emission  
rates have been geared to emerging control technology and assumed to be  
approximately two-thirds less than those specified by the new NSPS. This  
implies a 76% emission reduction compared to plants completed in !978, and  
91% compared to 1971 plants (see Table 2.2). This striking improvement- to  
a level cleaner than existing plants burning low-sulfuroil (Figs. 7.2 and 7 .3)- 
would enable utilities to significantly expand coal-generated electricity with­out exacerbating acid rain and most other emission-related effects of burning  
coal.  
28 Chapter2 Pollutant  
Sulfur Dioxide  
Particulates  
Nitrogen Ox ides  
Average  
Reduction  
Table 2.2  
Percentage Reductions In Emissions  
By Typical New Coal Plants  
Actual Projected  
From 1971 From 1978  
to 1978 to 1988  
74% 80%  
83% 80%  
35% 69%  
64% 76%  
From 1971  
to 1988  
95'7c  
97%  
80'7c  
91 o/c  
Obtaining these and other pollutant reductions is likely to add between  
$120/kW and $230/kW (in 1979 steam-plant dollars) to the costs of 1978 coal  
plants, as estimated in Chapter 7 and shown in Table 2.1. Most of the increase  
will go for nitrogen oxide control devices and improved solid waste disposal  
methods, since upgrading particulate and sulfur dioxide removal will probably  
cost less than past ( 1971-78) improvements. Baghouse filters appear capable  
of capturing 99.9% of particulate emissions for only 10-30% higher cost than  
typical 99.5%-efficient electrostatic precipitators today, and 95%-efficient  
sulfur dioxide scrubbers producing saleable wastes (sulfur, gypsum, or  
sulfuric acid) should cost only 15-50% more than current 75%-efficient waste­generating scrubbers.  
The average estimated incremental cost of these measures for 1988 coal  
plants is $175/kW above the cost of a 1978 plant with scrubbers. A $21 0/kW  
increase - about the same as the 1971-78 cost rise - is obtained by  
extrapolating the 1971-78 relationship between coal capital costs and sector  
size, based on assumed coal sector growth to 1988. g The resulting projected  
cost of about $800/kW, in 1979 steam-plant dollars, for coal plants beginning  
operation in 1988, would be sufficient to allow: (i) $ 15/kW for possible  
problems with new control devices or for currently unanticipated minor  
standards; (ii) $1 0/kW for the increased real cost of interest during  
construction anticipated as coal construction durations grow from five years  
( 1978 average) to six years for 1988 plants; and (iii) $1 0/kW for investments to  
g. This calculation is performed in Chapter 10 with the coal capital cost regression  
equation (Table 9. I). The six-year construction duration for 1988 plants mentioned in the text is  
also derived in Chapter 10. using the coal construction duration regression (Table 9.7).  
Chapter2 29 improve plant operating reliability.  
The close agreement between the two methods of projecting coal capital  
costs-engineering estimation and econometric, or regression, analysis­lends considerable credence to the $800/kW estimate. Moreover, both  
methods include substantial conservatisms, the former through very strict  
emission targets and generous cost estimates, the latter through a high estimate  
of 1978-88 coal sector growth ( 13 GW per year25 ) that allows for an upturn in  
coal orders due to reactor cancellations. These conservatisms and the long lead  
times for most coal plant regulatory requirements make it unlikely that actual  
costs for I 988 plants will significantly exceed these estimates.  
Nuclear Standards: Future reactors will have to institute a myriad of  
new safety measures not reflected in the approximately $900/kW average cost  
of plants completed in 1978-a figure that already exceeds the $800/kW  
projected cost of 1988 coal plants (both figures in 1979 steam-plant dollars).  
They will first have to make extensive design changes and equipment upgrad­ings already promulgated but not incorporated in most ! 978 units. These  
include: greater physical separation of redundant safety-related equipment  
such as electrical cables; more durable electrical components and wide-range  
instrumentation designed to function under accident conditions of high tem­perature, humidity, pressure, and radiation; and improved quality assurance  
programs to reduce design and construction defects such as seismic deficien­cies found belatedly in many operating reactors during 1979-80 (see Section  
5. l ).  
Further requirements will result from NRC's efforts to correct the !7  
unresolved safety issues-"matter[s] affecting a number of nuclear power  
plants that pose important questions concerning the adequacy of existing safety  
requirements for which a final resolution has not yet been developed ... " 26  
Many of these issues involve fundamental design considerations. For exam­ple, Asymmetric Blowdown Loads might require modifying pressurized water  
reactors to prevent postulated ruptures in reactor coolant pipes from over­stressing reactor vessel supports, a condition that could damage both normal  
and emergency cooling systems while impeding insertion of control rods to  
stop nuclear fissioning. Another unresolved issue, Systems Interactions, might  
require segregating all components and circuits of certain safety systems in  
costly "bunkered" housings to avert inter-system interferences that could  
degrade performance of vital equipment.  
Moreover, NRC's list of unresolved safety issues is growing, not shrink­ing (see Secticn 5 .3), fed by new licensing reviews and the growing inventory  
of operating experience-experience that will more than triple by 1988 if  
utilities realize their current expansion plans. Past practice indicates that these  
issues will be addressed incrementally, thwarting "licensing stabilization"  
and frustrating efforts to optimize design and construction. High costs and  
declining growth in electricity sales may force some utilities to extend con­30 Chapter2 struction schedules to conserve cash and preserve credit ratings. Although the  
effects of stretch-outs are usually expressed in current dollars, and, thus,  
appear inflated, they do increase real interest costs, disrupt construction  
logistics, and expose plants to additional regulatory requirements.  
Estimating Future Nuclear Costs: The additional costs of nuclear regu­latory standards for future plants cannot be estimated directly, for reasons  
discussed at the start of Section 2.5. Not only do nuclear design changes tend to  
"ripple" differently through reactor systems at different plants, but also many  
prospective standards have not yet been promulgated (most stemming from the  
Three Mile Island accident will not be determined for several years, as dis­cussed below). The alternative used here is to estimate future nuclear costs by  
assuming that the expansion of the nuclear sector now in progress will have the  
same proportional effect on reactor capital costs as in the past. That is, other  
things being equal, a doubling of nuclear capacity operating or under con­struction will lead to an approximately 50% rise in real reactor capital costs.  
This "sector-size hypothesis" is based on the historical relationships  
observed among growth in the nuclear sector, increases in regulatory strin­gency, and increases in nuclear costs. It is advanced here not as a means of  
projecting future nuclear costs precisely, but as an alternative to engineering­based estimates that are invariably overrun by ever-changing regulatory and  
design criteria. Linking costs to nuclear sector size is also superior to relating  
costs only to the passage of time, as has been done in the two econometric  
models cited earlier, since it more closely reflects the forces which, acting over  
time, add to reactor regulations and costs.  
The sector-size approach to estimating future costs is likely to evoke  
criticism from supporters of nuclear power, since it implies that nuclear  
economics will worsen steadily as the nuclear sector expands. Hence, it is  
important to clarify what the approach implies and what it does not.  
• The sector-size approach implies that costs will rise as more  
reactors are licensed, due to the many strong connections be­tween growth in sector size and increased regulatory stringency;  
it does not suggest that there is a simple, explicit causal link  
between the number of reactors and costs.  
• It implies that licensing interventions are among the factors  
engendering increased regulatory stringency; not that construc­tion delays caused by nuclear opponents have been a major  
factor in rising re11-l capital costs.  
• Use of the sector-size hypothesis to project costs also implies  
that, for the foreseeable future, increases in the number of  
operating plants will reveal new safety and operating problems,  
leading to new regulatory requirements and design changes  
which, in turn, will cause costs to rise. It does not deny that  
Chapter2 31 reactor construction has evidenced a "learning curve.'' Rather,  
it implies that, as in the past, increasing architect-engineer  
familiarity with nuclear construction will be outweighed by  
advancing regulatory criteria requiring A-Es to employ more  
labor. equipment, and materials to build nuclear plants.  
In summary, the sector-size model provides an indirect way to anticipate  
the future rate of increase in nuclear regulations and costs, provided that the  
conditions under which sector growth stimulated new regulations in the past  
remain in effect. This proviso is likely to hold so long as utilities seek to  
complete the approximately 90 GW of nuclear capacity with construction  
permits. These plants long ago gave impetus to new regulations that will raise  
reactor costs, when they were awarded construction permits in the 1970s,  
signalling to regulators the need for greater safety measures to prevent in­creases in the sector-wide· probability of a serious accident. In theory, the  
impetus could be defused if public attitudes toward nuclear risks change  
substantially or if it proves possible to dismiss outstanding regulatory issues  
without heightening accident risks. Neither event seems plausible, however.  
The growing number of genuine safety issues and the continued widespread  
mistrust of nuclear power strengthen the presumption that more stringent and  
expensive requirements are in the offing.  
The one eventuality that might be expected to slow the anticipated rate of  
increase in nuclear regulations and costs is cancellation of a large number of  
reactors with construction permits. (Most cancellations in recent years have  
befallen plants that merely were in the planning stage; because they had not  
received construction permits, they were not counted in tallying 1988 sector  
size.) Large-scale cancellations of plants being built would ease public con­cern and also enable regulators to relax growth in safety requirements some­what without driving up the sector-wide accident probability. Readjustment to  
reduced future capacity would be constrained, however, by continued detec­tion of safety problems through the operation of existing reactors. Indeed, as  
measured by the rate of issuance of NRC generic Bulletins and Circulars, the  
detection rate per reactor-year reached an all-time high during 1979-80 (see  
Figure 2.5). Even if the detection rate per reactor were to decline, the total  
number of safety problems detected per year could well continue to increase  
for some time to come as the number of plants in operation rises.  
Ideally, one would prefer to use both reactor operating experience and  
sector size as explanatory variables for projecting future costs. Unfortunately,  
the two are too closely correlated to permit valid statistical estimation of their  
joint relationship to capital costs. Thus, statistical necessity forced the choice  
of one of the two. Sector size was chosen because it appears to have had the  
more telling effect on costs, judging from both its greater statistical power, as  
discussed in Section 8. I, and from the historical analysis of the regulatory  
process presented in Section 2.5.  
32 Chapter2 .9  
.a  
.7  
.6  
.5  
.3  
.2  
.1  
Year  
Figure 2.5  
NRC Bulletins And Circulars Per Operating Reactor  
,3;!  
~Circulars  
OBuHetms  
.54  
71 72 73 74  
.19  
75 "' 77 78 79  
Bar widths represent numbers of licensed operating reactors (including partial years from  
commercial start. excluding units under 400 MWl. See Figure 5. I and p. 144 for explanation of  
Bulletins and Circulars.  
The omission of operating experience as an explanatory variable does not  
appear serious so long as the nuclear sector continues to expand rapidly, since  
growth in sector size will coincide closely with, and thus can subsume statisti­cally, growth in operating experience. If, however, nuclear growth slows  
significantly due to cancellations of many plants being built, reactor operating  
experience might become the dominant source of new regulations, and it  
would be necessary to add it to statistical models used to project future costs.  
For purposes of estimating the cost of new nuclear plants here, it is  
assumed that all reactors now holding construction permits are completed-a  
near-tripling of nuclear capacity to 150 GW, implying a continuation of  
nuclear power's rapid growth, and, thus, warranting use of the sector-size  
model to project costs. When Table 8. I, embodying the 1971-78 correlation  
between actual reactor costs and cumulative nuclear capacity,h is applied to a  
h. Cumulative nuclear capacity. rather than plant number. is employed as rhe proxy for  
the impetus behind more stringent standards. since the perceived hazard and the corresponding  
effort to reduce risks depend on plant size as well as number.  
Chapter2 33 1988 "standard reactor" (Table 10. I), the result is a calculated cost of  
approximately $1400/kW (in 1979 steam-plant dollars), 55% above the actual  
cost of a typical 1978 reactor. This cost includes real interest during construc­tion, whose cost share will increase due to the rise in projected construction  
time to an average of 8 years from 61 
h years for 1978 plants (Figure 2.3).  
Given the $800/kW cost projected for 1988 coal plants, the ratio between  
typical 1988 nuclear and coal capital costs would be 1.73. The 73% cost  
differential, although triple that in the establishment forecasts cited earlier,  
represents an increase of only 21 percentage points from the 52% differential  
for 1978 plants. It is also less than the estimates yielded by alternative  
regression models. When nuclear cost is represented as a function of both  
sector size and reactor operating experience (a statistically questionable pro­cedure-see above), the calculated 1988 nuclear cost is $1450/kW, 6% above  
the nuclear cost projected here and 83% greater than the coal projection.  
Alternatively, if the 1971-78 annual rates of increase in real costs are extrapo­lated to 1988, the resulting costs are $3140/kW for nuclear and $1230/kW for  
coal (in 1979 steam-plant dollars)-a 2.6 nuclear-coal ratio with over three  
times the cost differential projected here.  
Section 2.7: The Impact Of Three Mile Island  
The foregoing 1988 nuclear cost projection and outline of regulatory  
issues affecting reactor design and equipment are both based upon nuclear  
power as regulated through 1978. Thus, they do not explicitly reflect the  
effects of the March 1979 accident at Three Mile Island. The accident's impact  
has been profound, ''permanently alter[ing] the regulatory process for nuclear  
power,'' according to a Department of Energy analysis. 27 Because of exten­sive core damage, overheating of fuel rods, and shut-off of safety systems, the  
accident "exceeded many of the present design bases by a wide margin [and  
was] evidently a significant precursor of a core-melt accident,'' according to  
NRC's "Lessons Learned Task Force. " 28 Moreover, nuclear regulation and  
management as a whole were implicated in TMI, most tellingly in NRC's and  
industry's failure to learn from prior "dress rehearsal" accidents at two other  
reactors. 2 9  
As a result, post-TMI nuclear regulation will almost certainly reflect  
greater willingness than previously to pay more to obtain greater safety. Past  
regulation placed ''the burden of proof ... on the regulators to justify negative  
findings on safety matters, " 30 admits NRC Commissioner Gilinsky, and  
mandated only "the most conservative requirements consistent with the com­mercial viability of nuclear power.' ' 31 But the trauma of TMI has now ''shat­tered [NRC's] complacency" 32 about reactor hazards, says Gilinsky, and has  
34 Chapter2 led NRC Chairman Hendrie to put the nuclear industry on notice that "safety  
[not costs] must be the dominant element in our considerations. " 33 Such  
attitudinal changes would help fulfill the calls from the President's Commis­sion on the TMI Accident (the Kemeny Commission) and the NRC's own  
investigation for "fundamental changes" in the "practices and ... attitudes of  
the NRC" 34 and "in the way commercial nuclear reactors are built, operated  
and regulated. " 35  
Accordingly, NRC is expanding its licensing process to make "explicit  
consideration of accidents involving severely damaged or molten cores. " 36  
Among the many changes already ordered or being considered are: upgrading  
the "single-failure criterion" so that some safety equipment must function  
despite multiple equipment failures; providing capability to cool "degraded"  
reactor cores; strengthening reactor containments to mitigate previously "in­credible" core-melt accidents; expanding the "safety-related" classification  
of equipment subject to exacting quality assurance requirements; and requiring  
each reactor to install training simulators and no less than three heavily  
instrumented facilities for accident management (for technical support, opera­tional support, and emergency coordination). Each proposal has the potential  
to change plant designs significantly and to impose large costs and delays, as  
discussed in Chapter 6. Indeed, the pending rulemaking on degraded cores  
alone may take three years to complete and add 40 regulatory guides to the  
approximately I 50 now in effect. 37  
Section 2.8: Total Generating Costs  
Capital costs will strongly affect total generating costs of future plants,  
especially nuclear plants, but other cost factors will also play a part. Projected  
capital costs are combined with estimates of fuel costs and other factors in  
Table 2.3 to yield estimated life-cycle generating costs per-kilowatt-hour  
(kWh) for typical I 988 plants. The plants are assumed to be I I 50-MW  
capacity in the case of nuclear and 300-MW for coal. The calculated capital  
costs reflect the mix of multiple units, cooling towers, geographical location,  
etc. shown in Table 10.3. Operating costs are calculated for assumed 30-year  
plant lives spanning 1988-2017 (calculational methods are explained in Sec­tion 12. l). All costs are national-average estimates drawn from the most recent  
experience available and modified for likely future changes; they are expressed  
in 1979 constant dollars with assumed escalation rates stated relative to the  
producer price index. 38 The estimate bases are described fully in Chapter I I  
and are merely summarized here without citations.  
Capital Costs: The costs of power plant construction inputs are as­Chapter2 35 Table 2.3  
Projected Costs, 1988 Plants, U.S. Average  
(in 1979 constant dollars)  
Nuclear Coal  
Unit Size 1150MW 300MW  
Capital Cost S1460/kW S838/kW  
Decommissioning $138/kW  
Real Fixed Charge Rate 10.3% 9.8%  
Capacity Factor 60% 70o/c  
Capital Cost Fixed Charges 2.86¢/kWh I 34¢/kWh  
Decommissioning Fixed Charges .21¢/kWh  
Fuel 1.09¢/kWh 1.96¢/kWh  
Operating and Maintenance .62¢/kWh .62¢/kWh  
TOTAL 4.78¢/kWh 3.92¢/kWh  
Nuclear!Coal Cost Ratio 1.22  
sumed to inflate by I% annually relative to the producer price index (the  
approximate historical rate39). The costs of new nuclear and coal plants  
expressed in 1979 constant dollars deflated by producer price inflation are  
$1460/kW and $838/kW, respectively (see Section 12. I for calculations).  
(These are slightly higher than the costs calculated earlier in 1979 steam-plant  
dollars deflated by construction factor inflation.) For comparison with esti­mates expressed in unadjusted (as-spent) dollars, respective nuclear and coal  
costs in mixed current dollars would be approximately $2700/kW and $1600/  
kW, assuming annual inflation and interest rates of9%. 40  
Capacity Factors: A 60% capacity factor is assumed for 1150-MW  
nuclear units, equal to the average for all commercial reactors through mid­1980. This assumes substantial improvement from the historical experience  
for large reactors: units over 800 MW, which account for over half of all  
operating experience, have averaged only 54%. Increased size is significantly  
correlated with reduced nuclear performance; and increased age, later vin­tages, and duplicate designs have brought only modest improvements. The  
projection does not reflect the full brunt of prospective closer regulation of  
reactor operations after TMI.  
36 Chapter2 A 70% capacity factor is assumed for base-loaded 300-MW coal units,  
equalling the capability shown in performance data over the past decade for  
200-400 MW coal units, absent ''load-following." Mediocre capacity factors  
(55-65%) commonly cited for coal plants are for large units (over 400 MW)  
and also reflect intentional cutbacks dictated by excess capacity. Fully loaded•  
600-MW units would be expected to have 65% capacity factors, but because  
coal plants have relatively low capital costs, even 60% performance would add  
only 7% to coal generating costs.  
Fuel Costs: Refined uranium ore {U30g) is assumed to cost $35 per  
pound (1979 dollars), with ore depletion and environmental and occupational  
health regulations causing 2% annual escalation relative to the producer price  
index. Enrichment cost of $94 per "separative work unit" is assumed to  
escalate at 1.5% per year due to increasing power costs. Spent fuel disposal  
cost of $650/kilogram is two to three times DOE estimates, in consideration of  
chronic cost underestimation and continuing technical and institutional un­certainties, but it accounts for only 3% of total nuclear costs.  
The cost of coal fuel is extremely important to coal power costs. The cost  
assumed here is based upon the 1979 average cost of utility-burned coal of  
1.2¢/kWh (assuming a 10,000 Btu/kWh heat rate), escalated in real terms at  
2.3% per year-the 1974-79 average real rate-for 40 years. The resulting  
average fuel cost during the 1988-2017 period is I. 96¢/kWh (in 1979 constant  
dollars), 63% higher in real terms than the 1979 cost. Actual costs may be less  
than this projection in view of the very large reserves in all major U.S.  
coal-mining regions and the increasingly successful adaptation of mining  
design, technology, and management to the environmental and safety regula­tions that caused much of the real increases in prices in the 1970s. Although  
temporary shortages in coal supply could cause temporarily higher prices,  
reductions in the growth rate for electricity-coal's dominant present use­will probably prevent growth in total coal demand from outrunning expansion  
in mining capacity even if coal exports multiply and if coal makes substantial  
inroads into oil and gas markets (see discussion in Section 11.3).  
Operating and Maintenance Costs in 1979 averaged .4¢/kWh for nuclear  
plants and slightly over .2¢/kWh for coaL Anticipated safety and environmen­tal requirements, especially coal scrubber reagents and product disposal, are  
assumed to lift costs to .5¢/kWh in 1979 dollars for both plant types. Assumed  
1 %/year real escalation gives 1988-2017 "levelized" average O&M costs of  
about .6¢/kWh.  
Financing: Fixed charge rates of 10.3% for nuclear and 9.8% for coal  
are used to convert capital costs to annual costs. These rates are based on  
assumed inflation-adjusted costs of capital of 3.8% and 3.6%, respectively,  
reflecting a slight "risk premium" for nuclear investments. The nuclear rate  
Chapter2 37 also includes greater allowance for interim capital replacement-.5% vs .  
. 25% for coal-for anticipated decontamination and regulatory backfits.  
Decommissioning: Nuclear plants are assumed to be dismantled at a  
cost of $125/kW ( 1979 steam-plant dollars), based on a utility cost estimate  
which DOE considers "representative [but] subject to potential [real] es­calation.' ' 
41 This contributes slightly over 4% to calculated nuclear generating  
costs.  
Total Generating Costs: Life-cycle generating costs calculated with  
the above "base case" assumptions are 3.9¢/kWh for coal and 4.8¢/kWh for  
nuclear ( 1979 dollars). The 22% difference implies added costs of $45 million  
per year per 1000 MW of new nuclear capacity. The difference would stand at  
17% if "back-end" nuclear costs (decommissioning and spent fuel disposal)  
were halved. The difference could also shrink if reactor cancellations ease  
pressure to strengthen safety requirements, but it is more likely to increase as  
TMI intensifies regulatory efforts to reduce nuclear hazards, as discussed  
above.  
For projected costs to be equal, 1988 nuclear capital costs would need to  
be approximately $960/kW ( 1979 steam-plant dollars)-only 8% above the  
actual $887/kW cost of a typical 1978 reactor. Alternatively, real escalation of  
about 4% per year in delivered coal costs, implying that real coal prices would  
average 133% more during 1988-2017 than in 1979, would also equalize  
projected costs, as would a 78% nuclear capacity factor. Conversely, the  
average nuclear generating cost would be 36% above that of coal if, because of  
TMI or other serious accidents, the 1978-88 real nuclear capital cost increase is  
50% greater than projected. Even without this added increase, the nuclear-coal  
cost spread would be 39% if coal fuel costs escalate by only l %/year in real  
terms.  
Cost components and the conditions necessary to equalize nuclear and  
coal costs under widely varying but plausible assumptions are discussed in  
Chapter !2 and are shown in Table 2.4 and Figure 2.6. The table indicates that  
the projected nuclear/coal cost ratio is higher when "best" and "worst" cost  
cases are compared against each other. Moreover, because the best nuclear  
case has a higher projected cost than the base coal case, a nuclear advantage is  
possible (on an average basis) only through unanticipated escalation in coal.  
Although these are national average results, based on geographical  
composite plants, new nuclear plants appear equally disadvantaged in every  
region, as shown in Section 12.2. In the Northeast, for example, the greater  
nuclear construction cost premium would offset high coal delivery costs.  
Similarly, western coal mining costs are sufficiently low and the pollution­control specifications reflected in the costs of 1988 coal plants are already  
sufficiently strict that new California coal plants appear considerably less  
expensive than new reactors, notwithstanding their long distances from coal  
38 Chapter2 Table 2.4  
Breakeven Cost Calculations  
Paid-Off Share Annual Real  
Nuclear Coal Projected Nuclear- Of Nuclear Plant Coal Escalation  
Cases Cases Coal Cost Ratios For Breakeven For Breakeven  
BEST 1.49 55% 4.3%  
BASE BASE 1.22 30% 3.9%  
WORST 0.91 -l6% 3.2%  
BEST 1.27 32% 3.1%  
BEST BASE 1.03 5% 2.6%  
WORST 0.77 -45% 1.5%  
BEST 1.67 62% 5.0%  
CASE I BASE 1.36 41% 4.7%  
WORST 1.02 2% 4.1%  
BEST 2.25 84% 7.1%  
WORST BASE 1.84 69% 6.6%  
WORST 1.37 41% 5.3%  
Nuclear Cases  
BASE; See Table 12.1 (includes little or no TMI impact and 60% capacity  
factor)  
BEST: Little or no TMI impact. 65% capacity factor. and reduced uranium and  
enrichment costs in Case 6  
CASE 1: TMI adds 50% to extrapolated 1978-88 increases in construction cost  
and duration  
WORST; TMI doubles extrapolated 1978-88 increases in construction cost and  
duration, adds 0.5% to real nuclear rate of return. and reduces capacity  
factor to 55%: decommissioning charges tripie  
Coal Cases  
BASE: See Table 12.1 (includes 2.3%/year real fuel cost escalation and 70'K  
capacity factor)  
BEST: 10% reduction in capital cost. 1%/year real fuel cost escalation. and  
7:>% capacity factor  
WORST: 10% addition to capital cost. 4%/year real fuel cost escalation. and 60o/c  
capacity factor  
Paid-off nuclear plant share represents percentage of ultimate nuclear capital cost  
that utility would need to defray for nuclear generating cost to equal that of coal.  
Alternatively. annual coal fud escalation gives coal price increase rate necessary  
for breakeven.  
Nuclear Case I adds 50% to extrapolated 1978-88 increases in construction cost  
and duration as estimate of TMI impact. Best and Worst cases are author1s  
judgments of plausible extreme cases and are described in Table 12 .4. Base cases  
are shown in Table 2.3. -"" 0  
n  
::r  
.,  
"0  
r;  
..,  
N  
LEGEND  
Decom­mission  
3.20  
1.48  
Case  
Coal  
3.92  
1.96  
Base  
Case  
(most  
Figure 2.6  
Nuclear And Coal Generating Costs,  
1988 Plants, Plausible Cases  
5.25  
2.86  
Worst  
Case  
(in 1979 ¢/kWh)  
Case  
(noTMI)  
Nuclear  
Base  
Case  
(no TMI)  
Case 1  
(plausible  
TMI impact)  
plausible)  
See Table 12.4 for assumptions employed in each case.  
7.20  
~  
Worst  
Case fields. Finally, although costs of individual plants will differ from trends, most  
error bands in the cost regressions are narrow, and the scope is limited for  
reducing nuclear costs by optimizing plant parameters such as size or architect­engineer experience.  
Section 2.9: Conclusion  
Projections that electricity will be cheaper from new nuclear plants than  
from new coal facilities implicitly require that respective capital costs not  
differ by more than approximately 25%. However, nuclear capital costs in­creased more than twice as much as those of coal plants during 1971-78 and  
already exceed the latter by 50%. In return for increased costs, emissions of  
criteria air pollutants from new coal plants declined by almost two-thirds,  
compared to 1971 plants, and could fall by nine-tenths by the late 1980s to  
levels lower than those from plants burning low-sulfur oil. The far more costly  
attempts to contain nuclear hazards have produced largely putative, intangible  
reductions in accident probabilities, reductions whose significance seems  
questionable in light of the 1979 accident at Three Mile Island-then Amer­ica's newest reactor.  
Efforts to reduce the risks of nuclear power plants grew apace with  
expansion of the nuclear sector and were the key ingredient in causing nuclear  
capital costs to rise in real terms in the I 970s. If the past relationship between  
nuclear sector size and costs continues in the I 980s, the capital costs of  
reactors now starting construction would exceed those of new coal plants with  
advanced pollution controls by about 75%. The generating costs of new  
reactors would then average 20-25% more than those of new coal plants.  
Although the assumed rate of imposition of new nuclear regulatory standards  
could fall if many reactors under construction are cancelled, the salutary effect  
on nuclear cost increases would probably be offset by the added design and  
construction requirements stemming from TMI.  
These figures imply that a typical new nuclear plant with 30% of its  
capital cost paid off would not be a cheaper source of electricity than a new  
full-cost coal-fired plant. Accordingly, many reactors in early stages of con­struction appear to be potential candidates for economical replacement by coal  
facilities. Cancellation charges would add to the cost of abandoning nuclear  
projects, but they would be partially offset if some preparatory work at reactor  
sites, such as excavation and foundations, could be employed by replacement  
coal plants.  
The conclusion that clean coal plants can provide electricity more cheap­ly than nuclear plants is at variance with current dogma, but it is rooted firmly  
in empirical cost data, and requires only a modest extension of established  
regulatory and cost trends. It is incumbent upon nuclear proponents to either  
demonstrate why their own cost projections should be heeded in light of the  
Chapter2 41 evidence presented here, or to acknowledge that construction of new reactors  
cannot be justified on the basis of an economic comparison with coal.  
References  
l. S.M. Keeny. ed., Nuclear Power Issues and Choices (Ballinger. Cambridge. MA.  
1977), p. 123. Although the present author's Power Plant Performance (Council on Economic  
Priorities. New York, NY. 1976, p. 133) was one of the 12 sources cited. the cost ratio therein  
was based solely on AEC projections. Unlike the estimates in this book, it did not utilize  
empirical data and research.  
2. A.D. Rossin and T.A. Rieck, Science. 201. 586 ( 1978).  
3. U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). Annual Report to Congress. 1978.  
Mean costs of 1985 plants in 1978 dollars are nuclear, $765/kW (p. 217); coal. $650/kW (p.  
386).  
4. National Academy of Sciences, Energy in Transition. 1985-2010 (Washington. DC.  
1979).p.318.  
5. C. Blake el a/., Analysis of Projected vs. Actual Costs for Nuclear and Coal Fired  
Power Plants (Mitre Corp .. McLean. VA, 1976).  
6. W.K. Davis and R.O. Sandberg. Light Water Reactors: Economics and Prospects  
(Bechtel Power Corp .. San Francisco. CA. February 1979).  
1. LC. Bupp et al., Trends in Light Water Reactor Capital Costs in the United States:  
Causes and Consequences, CAP 74-8 (Center for Policy Alternatives. MIT. Cambridge. MA.  
1974). Abridged in Technology Review, 77 (No.2), 15-25 ( 1975).  
8. W. Mooz, Cost Analysis of Light Water Reactor Power Plants. R-2304-DOE (1978).  
and A Second Cost Analysis of Light Water Reactor Power Plants. R-2504-RC ( 1979) (RAND  
Corporation. Santa Monica. CA).  
9. Whitman, Requardt and Associates. Handy-Whitman Index of Public Utility Construe·  
lion Costs (Baltimore. MD). The compound average I 965-78 inflation rates. 7.5% coal and 7. I%  
nuclear. are reflected in the data base steam-plant-dollar capital costs.  
10. See Electric Power Research Institute (EPR!l. Technical Assessment Guide, EPR!  
PS-120 1-SR (Palo Alto. CA. 1979). p. 8-5: U.S. Energy Research and Development Administra­tion (now DOE). Concept. Phase IV, User's Manual, ERDA· 108 ( 1975). Table 3.2.  
II. Reference 10, EPRI. p. 8-3.  
12. Costs of scrubbers were measured separately because few sample plants have them  
(15 of I 16). and thus their effect would not have been adequately reflected in the sector size  
coefficient. Omitting the scrubber variable raises that coefficient to .86 but yields lower I 978 and  
1988 coal plant costs than obtained here. See Section 10.2.  
13. Although the coal sample extends only through 1977. it includes several plants  
ordered later than all I 978-completed plants, so its sector size value (measured according to date  
ordered) reflects 1978 installations. See Appendix 2.  
14. Assumed annual real costs of capital are 2.8% for 197! plant and 3.3% for 1978, from  
NRC. Treatment of inflation in the Development of Discount Rates and Leve/izedCosts in NEPA  
Analyses For the Electric Utiliry Industry, NUREG-0607 (1980), Table I. Weighted cost of  
capital. with common stock yield based on price earnings ratio. without inflation {implicit price  
42 Chapter2 deflator). was averaged for 1967-71 for 1971 plant and 1972-77 for 1978 plant.  
15. The nuclear industry's widely cited 1978 U.S. per-kWh generating cost averages of  
1.5~ for nuclear plants and 2.3~ for coal plants rest on omission of nearly all the costliest nuclear  
plants and cheapest coal plants. See Section 1.2 and C. Komanoff. Power Propaganda (En·  
vironmental Action Foundation. Washington, DC. 1980).  
16. 1. Crowley in Nuclear Engineering International. 23 (No.7), 39 ( 1978).  
17. Atomic Industrial Forum (A!F). Licensing, Design and Construction Problems:  
Priorities for Solution (Washington, DC. 1978), Exhibits I and 9.  
18. Reference 17. p. I.  
19. A.M. Weinberg. The Wilson Quarterly. III(No. 3), 96(1979). Emphasis in original.  
20. ACRS Chairman W.D. Manly. letter to AEC Chairman Glenn T. Seaborg. 24  
November 1965. Reprinted in Joint Committee on Atomic Energy (JCAE}. Hearings on Ucens·  
ing and Regulation of Nuclear Reactors, 1967. p. 119.  
21. AEC. Technical Report on Anticipated Transients Without Scram for Water-Cooled  
Reactors. WASH-1270 ( 1973), p. 6. Emphasis added.  
22. E.S. Rolph, Nuclear Power and the Public Safety (Lexington Books. Lexington.  
MA.I979}.p.l24.  
23. Statement by ACRS Chairmen N.J. Palladino ( 1967) and D. Okrent ( 1966) before the  
JCAE. 5 April 1967. Reprinted in Reference 20. p. 92.  
24. NRC. Nuclear Power Plant Licensing: Opportunities for Improvement, NUREG­0292 ( 1977). p. 3-3.  
25. The assumed growth in coal sector size. from 217 GW in 1978 to 347 GW in 1988.  
approximates the growth projections in National Electric Reliability Council (NERC), 9th  
Annual Review of Overall Reliability and Adequacy of the North American Bulk Power System  
(Princeton. NJ. 1979).  
26. NRC.Identification of Unresolved Safety Issues Pertaining to Nuclear Power Plants.  
NUREG-0510 ( 1979), p. 10.  
27. DOE. Nuclear Power Regulation. DOE/ElA-0201/10 ( 1980}, p. xiv.  
28. NRC. TMI-2 Lessons Learned Task Force Final Report. NUREG-0585 {1979).  
p. 3-5.  
29. SeeM. Rogovin eta/ .. Three Mile Island: A Report to rhe Commissioners and to the  
Public ( 1980). Vol. I, p. 94ff.  
30. V. Gilinsky. Speech at Brown University. Providence. RI. 15 November 1979.  
3 L Reference 22. p. 17  
32. Reference 30.  
33. J .M. Hendrie. Speech at the AIF International Conference on Financing Nuclear  
Power. Copenhagen, 24 September 1979.  
34. J .G. Kemeny eta/ .. Report of the President's Commission on the Accident at Three  
Mile!sland(l979). p. 7.  
35. Reference 29, VoL I. p. 91.  
Chapter2 43 36. NRC. NRC Action Plan Developed As A Result of the TMT-Accidem. NUREG-0660.  
Vol. I (1980). p. 11-1.  
37. Reference 36. p. IT .B-12: and Tnside N.R .C .. 2 (No. 15). 7 ( 1980).  
38. The producer price index for industrial commodities has exceeded the GNP implicit  
price deflator by about V,% per year in recent years.  
39. Average annual compound 1965-79 Handy-Whitman escalation. deflated with the  
producer price index. was .64% for nuclear plants .. 98% for fossil.  
40. Calculated from costs in 1979 steam-plant dollars without !DC. assuming 1980-88  
construction for nuclear and 1982-88 for coal. I 3% construction inflation from 1979 to 1980 and  
9% annually thereafter. and a 9o/c annual !DC rate.  
41. Reference.27. p. 172.  
44 Chapter2 3  
The Sources Of  
Nuclear Regulatory  
Requirements a  
From where do new nuclear safety requirements arise? This question is  
critical to the future of nuclear power in the United States. Reactor construc­tion costs have risen rapidly, even after adjusting for the effects of inflation, as  
Chapters 8 and !0 show. Much of this real increase in costs resulted from  
promulgation of more stringent regulatory standards. Yet future standards and  
their costs have proven difficult to predict. An analysis of the processes  
involved in developing safety requirements may provide insight into the future  
rate of their imposition, and, thus, into future nuclear costs.  
This chapter reviews the evolution of commercial nuclear power regu­lation and licensing in the United States. It indicates that increased regulatory  
stringency arises primarily from three phenomena: the attempt to reduce the  
permissible risk to public health and safety per reactor; new information  
indicating that current standards are insufficient to reduce risks to the desired  
levels; and the greater documentation and standardization of regulatory re­quirements that accompany expansion of the regulatory effort. These phe­nomena, in turn, are fed primarily by six distinct motivating sources:  
I. increases in reactor population requiring that the per-plant risk  
be reduced in order to limit the overall accident probability;  
2. increases in reactor size expanding the potential consequences  
and probabilities of accidents;  
3. government and industry design and licensing reviews dis­covering new safety issues;  
4. reactor operating experience also uncovering previously unde­tected safety problems and underscoring the severity of known,  
unresolved issues;  
a, A slightly altered version of this chapter has been accepted for publication in Nuclear  
Safety, 22 (No. 4)(July/August 1981).  
Chapter 3 45 5. public concern contributing to both reducing permissible risks  
and to the unearthing of new safety problems; and  
6. increases in the size and purview of regulatory staff resulting  
from the increase in reactor population and the foregoing five  
factors.  
The chapter begins with a brief history of nuclear power commercialization in  
the United States and then explores each of the six sources of increased  
regulatory stringency listed above. It concludes by considering the relation­ship between increased stringency and nuclear power expansion and by asses­sing the prospects for stabilizing regulatory requirements.  
Section 3.1: The Expansion of Nuclear Power  
The modern era ofnuclearpoweroperation in the United States began 13  
years ago, with declarations on New Year's Day !968 that "commercial  
operation" status had been achieved at America's first 500-megawatt (MW)- 
class reactors- the Haddam Neck (CT) and San Onofre (CA) plants. Previ­ously, U.S. power reactors comprised only the dozen 10-75 MW reactors that  
started entering service in the late 1950s and three 200-MW-class plants that  
began operating in the early 1960s. 1 All were subsidized under the Power  
Reactor Demonstration Program managed by the Atomic Energy Commission  
(AEC) from 1955 to 1963 to promote commercialization of nuclear power.  
These reactors were succeeded by a dozen so-called "turnkey" plants  
provided at a fixed price (and at a loss) by Westinghouse and General Electric  
(GE). The order for the first of these, 650-MW Oyster Creek in 1963, was  
heralded as proof that nuclear power could compete economically with fossil  
generation of electricity, without direct government support of plant construc­tion or the fuel cycle. The nearly identical Nine Mile Point I unit was ordered  
several months later and built on a commercial (non-turnkey) basis. After a  
two-year pause, the other turnkey plants, also in the 500-800 MW range, were  
ordered in 1965 and early 1966. Most entered service between late 1969 and  
1972.  
Following (and occasionally overlapping with) the turnkey contracts  
came a second and much larger wave of reactor·orders. Fifteen additional units  
were ordered in 1966, and twice that number in the following year. These  
reactors averaged several hundred megawatts more than their immediate pre­decessors. Some surpassed 1000 MW, up to five times the capacity of the  
largest operating reactors. This not only violated the power industry's precept  
against large jumps in unit sizes, but also raised significant new safety issues,  
as discussed below.  
Nevertheless, the nuclear rush was on. After over a decade of striving,  
with limited success, to advance nuclear power as a commercial power source,  
46 Chapter3 the AEC was suddenly being required in the mid-to-late sixties to license and to  
ensure the safety of dozens of large reactors, with many more expected to  
follow shortly. 2  
Section 3.2: Reducing The Accident Probability Per Plant  
Following the Three Mile Island accident in March 1979, nuclear pio­neer Alvin Weinberg wrote that' 'For nuclear energy to grow in usefulness, the  
accident probability per reactor will simply have to diminish. " 3 Otherwise,  
nuclear expansion could lead to such a high rate of accidents per year that the  
public's confidence in nuclear power would collapse and plants would be  
forced to close.  
Weinberg's prescription appears to have been followed historically. As  
nuclear power has expanded, nuclear regulators have tried ever harder to  
reduce new reactors' risks to prevent the overall nuclear accident probability  
from expanding as fast as the reactor population.  
Although it is not codified in regulations, this effort informs much of the  
advocacy of improvements in nuclear safety within the regulatory community  
over the past decade and a half. It is particularly pronounced in the recom­mendations of the Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards (ACRS), an  
influential body of senior nuclear safety experts that advises the Nuclear  
Regulatory Commission (NRC, formerly AEC) on safety matters and individu­al reactor licensing applications. 4 In November 1965, for example, the ACRS  
called upon AEC to upgrade standards for reactor pressure vessels on the  
grounds that  
[Tjhe orderly growth of the industry, with concomitant increase in num­ber, size, power level and proximity of nuclear power reactors to large  
population centers will, in the future, make desirable, even prudent,  
incorporating stricter design standards in many reactors. 5  
The letter stimulated major efforts by AEC and the nuclear industry to improve  
the design, fabrication, and "in-service inspection" of reactor vessels. 6 It  
also led to a 1967 AEC report on emergency core cooling systems (ECCS) that  
recommended improvements in the manufacture and inspection of nuclear  
piping, valves, and pumps because "the large number of plants now being  
constructed and planned for the future makes it prudent that even greater  
assurance be provided henceforth. " 1 Also in that year, the ACRS urged that  
greater attention be paid to reactor safety problems because ''large increases in  
the number of reactors lead to the desire to make still smaller the already small  
probability per reactor that an accident of any significance will occur. " 8  
Similar sentiments were expressed by the ACRS during the 1970s to  
support more stringent standards. Two ACRS chairmen, one of whom subse­Chapter 3 47 quently chaired the NRC, told the Congressional Joint Committee on Atomic  
Energy in 1971 that "the high degree of conservatism used in both nuclear  
plant designs and in safety reviews'' was justified by ''the increased number of  
reactors soon to be operating and ... the trend toward large reactors of higher  
power densities. " 9 Two years later, the ACRS asked the AEC chairwoman to  
seek improvements in ECCS on the grounds that '' ... for an expanding nuclear  
industry, the cumulative effects of the added improvements represent prudent  
goals." 10  
The AEC regulatory staff also appears to have been guided by consider­ations of the total sector accident frequency. In 1973, when recommending  
back-up shut-down systems to prevent events in which the control rods fail to  
scram (shut down) the reactor during sudden interruptions in its normal  
operation (events known as Anticipated Transients Without Scram, or  
ATWS), the staff wrote th.at "since larger safety margins are appropriate as  
increasing numbers of power reactors are built and operated, design improve­ments should be made to reduce the probability of A TWS in new plants to a  
negligible level. .. '' 11 Staff further wrote,  
The present likelihood of a severe A TWS event is considered by the staff to  
be acceptably small, in view of the limited number of plants now in  
operation, the reliability of current protection system designs, and the  
expected occurrence rate of anticipated transients of potential safety signi­ficance. As more plants are built, however, the overall chance of ATWS  
will increase, and the staff believes that design improvements are appro­priate to maintain and to improve further the safety margins provided for  
the protection of the public. 12  
In other words, as more reactors come into operation, the per-reactor probabil­ity of an accident must be reduced in order to control the overall accident  
frequency. Similarly, in 1975 the staff mandated improvements in leakage  
control systems for main steam isolation valves because "there is a need for  
design improvements to provide appropriate safety margins for the large  
number of plants now planned.'' 13 Conversely but consistently, "the limited  
number of operating nuclear power reactors'' in 1980 following the slowdown  
in reactor licensing and construction in the late 1970s was cited by the staff as a  
reason to grant utilities several years to phase in ATWS-mitigating design  
changes rather than requiring them immediately. 14  
Section 3.3: Increases In Reactor Size  
Many of the statements quoted above cite increases in reactor power level  
as well as in the number of reactors as a source of concern. And indeed, the  
rapid increases in reactor generating capacities - from 200 MW for plants  
48 Chapter 3 licensed in the mid-1950s to 600 MW in the mid-1960s and I 000 MW shortly  
thereafter - induced regulators to seek more stringent safety measures.  
Accidents at larger reactors could have more serious consequences since they  
carry more fuel with a proportionately greater fission product inventory which  
is subject to release. In addition, greater preventive measures were required to  
constrain large units' accident probabilities. As AEC regulatory staff stated in  
1967,  
The increase in this potential hazard [from larger reactors] must be  
matched by corresponding improvement in the safety precautions and  
requirements if the safety status is to keep pace with advancing techno­logy. The protective systems must have shorter response times, larger  
capacities and greater reliability to cope with the more rigorous demands  
presented by the large reactors. 15  
Although the need for shorter emergency response times has receded  
somewhat since thinner fuel rods with reduced fuel center-line temperatures  
began to be introduced in the early to mid-l970s, larger plants do generate  
proportionately more "decay heat" following reactor shutdown. Removal of  
decay heat is a particular concern in many postulated accidents, including  
small-break loss-of-coolant accidents (LOCAs). As the ACRS noted in 1967,  
"the decay heat production from a large reactor such as ... Browns Ferry [1098  
MW] begins to approach a level comparable to the original full load power  
level of the Shippingport Reactor [70 MW]." 16  
Moreover, starting with the commercial-size plants first licensed in the  
early 1960s, new reactors required concrete shielding for the containment  
walls to reduce exposure to nearby persons in the event of accidents. This  
further cut down the rate of heat dissipation through the containment. As a  
result, whereas reactor vessels were believed capable of containing a 100-MW  
molten core, a 1000-MW core "would eat its way right through the pressure  
vessel'' and perhaps through the containment as well. 17 The result was that as  
plant sizes grew, increased consideration was given to the ECCS, to systems  
for removing decay heat from containment, and to systems for removing  
radioactivity from the containment atmosphere to reduce leakage. 18  
Concerns over increasing reactor sizes and increasing reactor numbers  
combined to produce more stringent regulatory standards for ECCS and prim­ary reactor piping in the late 1960s. The ACRS was particularly troubled by  
uncertainties in ECCS performance for the first 800-MW reactors. In !966 it  
drafted a letter to the AEC chairman asserting that  
[A]s more and more reactors come into existence, particularly reactors of  
larger size and higher power density, the consequences of failure of  
emergency core cooling systems take on increased importance. 19  
Chapter 3 49 Although never formally sent, the letter apparently contribured to General  
Electric's decision to expand the ECCS at the Dresden reactors under construc­tion by adding a separate core flooding system to the two ECCS core spray  
systems. 20 Perhaps more importantly for the long-term, the letter led AEC to  
establish the study group on ECCS referred to earlier. The stress in the group's  
report on the difficulty of delivering cooling water to a partially-melted and  
reshaped core highlighted the importance of equipment to prevent or promptly  
halt any loss-of-coolant-accident.  
This and other recommendations in the report prompted the reactor  
vendors to increase in-service inspection and leak-detection tests for primary  
system piping and to further expand the diversity and reliability of the ECCS to  
ensure that it could respond to a wider range of system pressures corresponding  
to a greater number of potential accidents. 21 GE substantially increased the  
capacities of the ECCS core flooding and core spray systems for Browns Ferry  
(1 100-MW class) compared to those for Dresden or Quad Cities (800-MW  
class.)22 Finally, the report's implicit finding that current containment de­signs might not suffice to contain a melted core sparked concern over ECCS  
performance, both within and outside the AEC, and helped lay the basis for the  
tumultuous ECCS rulemaking hearings in the early 1970s.  
Section 3.4: Growth Of The NRC Licensing Effort  
The increase in the number of applications for reactor construction  
permits and operating licenses has also contributed to growth in regulatory  
requirements. The increase has necessitated a larger NRC staff that in tum  
permitted a broader range of safety issues to be examined. It also has led to  
standardized review procedures that have tended to raise the stringency of  
standards applied to all plants. Many specific applications have raised new  
safety concerns, provoking development of new criteria that have been ex­tended to other reactors.  
AEC staff reviews of the first commercial-size reactors were generally  
limited and haphazard. Each construction-permit application was reviewed by  
several engineers from the Hazards Evaluation Branch within AEC's licensing  
division. Experts outside the division had to be called upon for technical  
support, and staff positions on specific design issues were frequently casually  
codified and documented. Although the first draft reactor general design  
criteria were issued for comment in 1965, 23 few standards had been de­veloped to determine whether proposed designs and equipment satisfied the  
criteria. According to licensing specialist B. N. Naft of NUS Corp., "In the  
days of the earliest commercial plants, guidance from AEC was based on direct  
communications and what 'the last applicant had been through.' ''24  
By early 1967, with a dozen large reactors under construction and over a  
dozen more construction-permit applications docketed, AEC began to signifi­50 Chapter3 cantly expand its licensing division to cope with the expanded caseload. The  
larger staff included reactor specialists who could question applicants more  
thoroughly on plant designs and construction methods. "Word-of-mouth"  
approvals of design approaches were superseded by detailed examinations  
requiring documentation of engineering assumptions, analyses, and tests.  
The AEC also moved to formalize licensing reviews in order to equalize  
the scrutiny applied to different reactors, to expedite applicants' responses,  
and to establish uniform procedures to be followed by the growing staff.  
Licensing positions on specific safety issues were detailed in' 'Branch Techni­cal Positions." In 1970, staff inaugurated a series of Regulatory Guides (RGs,  
initially called Safety Guides) specifying acceptable approaches to proble­matic design and construction issues. Early guides often did not contain new  
approaches but rather codified previously-developed positions to provide  
documentation needed by both staff and applicants. Subsequent guides were  
generated so that guidelines that had been formulated and used in individual  
reactor reviews could be employed for other applications. As the staff and the  
licensing effort grew, all construction permit reviews began to be pegged to the  
highest common denominator. This process elicited greater conservatism in  
areas such as design of engineered safeguards and quality assurance (QA)  
programs.  
The number of Regulatory Guides grew from three in 1970 to 21 in 1971  
and 33 in 1972. Some were innocuous from a cost standpoint, but others­those pertaining to construction methods, seismic criteria, and engineered  
safeguards - engendered design changes and cost increases. The guides'  
status also evolved from guidelines to requirements. Staff usually insisted  
upon close adherence to the practices outlined in the guides, and applicants  
"volunteered" to conform rather than engage in time-consuming negotia­tions. As a consultant report to NRC noted, "Utilities often conclude that  
proposing alternatives to solutions and approaches identified in NRC guidance  
would be too costly. In these cases the NRC guidance serves as de facto  
regulation. " 25  
The Standard Review Plan, a compilation of internal review procedures  
begun by AEC in 1972 and initially issued by NRC in 1975, has also tended to  
raise regulatory practice to the highest common denominator. The plan con­tains the criteria new plants must satisfy and staff procedures for assessing  
whether the criteria are met. It was developed to provide a handbook of  
requirements for the growing staff, to serve as a benchmark for evaluating  
changes in regulatory practice, and to standardize licensing criteria. It has had  
to be updated continuously to keep up with proliferating new requirements.  
The Standard Review Plan now references approximately !50 Regulatory  
Guides (many in their second or third edition) and the number is still growing,  
fed by new staff reviews and expanding reactor operating experience.  
Many Regulatory Guides have been prompted by particular license  
applications. As the AEC deputy director of regulation stated in 1967,  
Chapter3 51 [W]hen any safety problem is first encountered by our regulatory staff.,,  
we first encounter it on a case-by-case basis. In that process ... we might  
come to understand the issues involved, the effects that might result with  
respect to reactor safety and what the protective mechanisms might be. 26  
Seismic issues, for example, were first raised in the early 1960s in applications  
to build reactors near earthquake faults in California, at Bodega Bay on the  
northern coast and at Malibu near Los Angeles. Prior to these applications,  
AEC had not considered seismic phenomena in licensing and had no familiar­ity with them. (Two small California reactors licensed in the 1950s, GE's  
Vallecitos test facility and the Humboldt Bay plant, received no detailed  
seismic review at that time and subsequently shut down in the late 1970s rather  
than upgrade seismic safeguards at high cost.) Shortly thereafter, AEC com­missioned seismological and geological research demonstrating that the east­ern United States also has considerable seismic potential. In addition, new  
research in soil mechanics and in structural seismic response led to improved  
understanding of the transmittal of seismic loadings to reactor equipment. This  
information led to eight Regulatory Guides delineating methods of calculating  
earthquake forces and specifying the instrumentation, structural reinforce­ment, and component reliability necessary to reduce susceptibility to damage  
and accidents, which apply, in varying degrees, to all U.S. reactors.  
Similarly, concern over intermingling instrumentation for reactor con­trol (operation) and safety (shutdown) first emerged as a significant issue in the  
ACRS review of the pressurized water reactor (PWR), Diablo Canyon I in  
1967. This Westinghouse-designed unit "was to be one of the first of the  
high-power PWRs built. .. which made it a logical reactor on which not only to  
look for new, previously unanticipated issues, but to resolve some that had  
been ongoing," according to one long-time ACRS member. 27 The questions  
raised in the Diablo Canyon review were also directed at the next Westing­house reactor in line for a construction permit, Prairie Island, even though the  
much smaller Prairie Island design had already been accepted by AEC staff. 28  
These and all succeeding Westinghouse plants were ultimately required to  
increase the separation of control and safety circuits, although not to the extent  
desired by some ACRS members. 29  
Specific license applications have brought other safety issues to the fore.  
Hurricanes were first considered in the construction permit review for Turkey  
Point in Florida in I 966 and subsequently were factored into the reviews of all  
East and Gulf Coast sites, and even many flood-prone inland sites. 30 Tornado­protection requirements began to be applied to new reactors in the late 1960s  
after the first review for a reactor in a high-tornado area- GE's Southwest  
Experimental Fast Oxide Reactor (SEFOR) in Arkansas - established that  
tornadoes occurred sufficiently frequently in most parts of the country to  
warrant uniform defenses in design. 31 Similarly, some sites with relatively  
high population densities appear to have acted as "magnets" for greater  
52 Chapter3 regulatory emphasis on engineered safeguards which then spread to other  
reactors. 32  
Operating license reviews have also uncovered generic issues leading to  
changes in regulations. During late construction at Oyster Creek in 1967,  
cracks resulting from a combined design and welding deficiency were dis­covered in most of the control rod housings. When AEC staff examined the  
utility's quality assurance program, it found widespread deficiencies in field  
construction, installation of instrumentation and power circuits, and equip­ment procurement, including installation of secondhand valves of unknown  
condition. These findings provided greater impetus for increased AEC inspec­tions and audits and for promulgation of quality assurance regulations. 33  
Section 3.5: Industry Reviews  
Reviews of new reactors by utilities, reactor vendors, and architect­engineers (A-Es) have also developed information contributing to changing  
standards. These reviews are usually considerably more detailed than those by  
NRC, which primarily audits industry's analyses. Accordingly, industry ana­lyses of new designs or of new reactors employing previously approved  
designs sometimes uncover safety problems that NRC staff failed to unearth  
independently.  
An example is the "pressure-suppression" issue for boiling water re­actor (BWR) containment structures. BWR containments have progressed  
through three stages: Mark I containments are used at most operating BWRs  
and at several nearing completion; most BWRs now in advanced construction  
employ Mark II designs, while most in design or early construction will use  
Mark III. All three containments employ a pool of water as a heat sink located  
in, below, or around the primary containment wall. They differ with regard to  
the materials employed, the geometry of the pool and the configuration for  
venting air or steam during accidents.  
As part of its development of engineering data required by NRC to  
approve the Mark III, GE constructed a test facility in 1975 to measure the  
pressures that would be exerted on structures within containment during  
postulated accidents. These tests showed that very large vibratory pressures  
could result from the rush of air and steam from the reactor into the surrounding  
pool during a LOCA. This ledGE and NRC to question the adequacy of Mark I  
and II designs along with that of the less-developed Mark III, and to bolster all  
of the containments to reduce the chances of equipment failure during possible  
accidents. At plants under construction or in design, extra steel has been added  
to reinforced concrete containment walls, all-steel containment walls have  
been thickened or further ribbed, and supports have been strengthened for  
equipment located within the pool area. 34  
An analogous example affecting PWRs concerns possible "asymmetric  
Chapter 3 53 loading" on reactor vessel supports. In 1975, Westinghouse and the Virginia  
Electric & Power Company (VEPCO) notified NRC of findings from improved  
analytical models being applied to the North Anna plant then under construc­tion: certain postulated LOCAs could create "pressure transients" in the  
reactor vessel that could overstress the vessel supports. The resulting displace­ment of the vessel could compress the fuel assemblies and prevent control-rod  
insertion, disable the ECCS, and damage supports for the reactor coolant  
pumps and steam generators. 35 This previously unidentified scenario was  
subsequently established as an unresolved safety issue- a pending, generic  
problem whose resolution may require formulation of new regulatory require­ments (see Section 5.3).  
These examples illustrate NRC's involvement in industry's contribution  
to increased standards. Also relevant are the standards and codes developed by  
technical societies such as the American Society of Mechanical Engineers  
(ASME) or the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers {IEEE), whose  
members work in various facets of reactor technology and safety. Over a  
hundred of these documents issued since the late 1960s have led to more  
stringent manufacturing, testing, and performance criteria for structural  
materials such as concrete and steel and for basic components such as valves,  
pumps, and cables. Most of the codes have been "endorsed" by NRC Regula­tory Guides; indeed, in some instances the industry-dominated committees  
drafting new stringent standards have "justified their stance by stating that  
unless industry addressed these concerns the NRC would in regulatory  
guides. " 36  
Section 3.6: Reactor Operating Experience  
Reactor technology was initially developed with an expectation that its  
design, construction, and operation could be rigorously controlled and man­aged. Nuclear pioneers concentrated their analytical efforts on physics matters  
such as reactivity accidents, and devoted less attention to the difficult en­gineering problems of integrating the nuclear steam system with the balance of  
the power plant, keeping coolant water circulating in the core, and providing  
safeguards to prevent or mitigate accidents.  
These problems began receiving attention in the reviews of the first  
500-MW-class reactors in the early 1960s. Criteria considered excessively  
conservative were specified in some instances because of the paucity of  
engineering experience. It was anticipated that favorable operating data would  
ultimately allow some standards to be relaxed. In actuality, reactor compo­nents and equipment have frequently failed to achieve intended levels of  
reliability and performance. Although operating experience has sometimes  
justified reduced design margins (in fuel performance, for example), it has  
more often warranted corrective standards and ~ngendered a more conserva­54 Chapter) tive overall regulatory approach.  
Nuclear operating experience has come in two waves. The first consisted  
of the three 200-MW reactors and the dozen units under 100 MW licensed in  
the late 1950s and the 1960s. Although these reactors had accrued only 60  
unit-years of operation by early 1967, this experience provided sufficient  
evidence for the ACRS to conclude that, "based on reactor operating ex­perience ... a variety of reactor transients have occurred, a variety of protective  
features have malfunctioned or been unavailable on occasion, and a variety of  
defects have been found in operation. " 37  
The ACRS cited these specific failures:  
I. loss of norrnal and emergency power in the same incident;  
2. simultaneous loss of all (as many as five) incoming power  
lines;  
3. blowdown of a primary coolant system;  
4. loss of all protection provided by the capability for automatic  
scramming of control rods;  
5. sticking and breaking of control rods;  
6. rupture of a poison sparger ring;  
7. failure of structural members within the pressure vessel;  
8. faulty design of a steam generator support;  
9. cracks in large pipes and studs;  
10. poor choice of material for vital components;  
11. melting of some fuel elements;  
12. consecutive procedural errors; and  
13. safety systems not wired up in accordance with design criteria  
even after extensive test programs.  
Although it is not possible here to trace specific upgrading of standards to these  
failures, the "lack of perfection in design, construction and operation" 38 was  
a major reason for the ACRS's advocacy in the mid-to-late 1960s of conserva­tive design practices and improved safeguards. For example, the ACRS's  
portentous 1965 letter to AEC on pressure vessel integrity was prompted by  
one member's concern over failures such as broken stud bolts at the vessel head  
closure and cracked main control rod shafts. These were "incipient failures  
which, had complete failure occurred, would have resulted in more serious  
accidents than any thus far experienced.'' 39  
Commercial-size (400+ MW) reactors have registered a far larger body  
of operating experience, beginning with the 1968 start-up of Connecticut  
Yankee and San Onofre. Experience with these larger reactors accumulated  
slowly at first, reaching only II unit-years at the end of 1970. But it ap­preciated rapidly as more reactors were completed, reaching 36 unit-years at  
the end of 1972, and 94 after 1974. This operating experience included fuel  
leakage, pipe cracks, faulty installation of control rods, operator disabling of  
Chapter 3 55 shutdown systems, and malfunctioning valves, pumps, and cables. NRC staff  
later characterized this as a "considerable body of operating reactor experi­ence [which by 1972] indicated the need for expanded technical review in areas  
previously thought to be not sufficiently important to warrant much at­tention." 40  
Utilities report operating problems and deviations in "licensee event  
reports" (originally called "abnormal occurrence reports") to NRC's Office  
of Inspection and Enforcement (originally AEC's Division of Operating Re­actors). Not all reports have stimulated corrective action, however. For exam­ple, the stuck pressurizer relief valve that caused a substantial loss of primary  
coolant at Davis-Besse in 1977 was not corrected at other Babcock & Wilcox  
reactors, and contributed to the Three Mile Island (TMI) accident. NRC's  
Special Inquiry Group on TMI inferred from this and other disregarded pre­cursor events to TMI that ''NRC and the industry have done almost nothing to  
evaluate systematically the operation of existing reactors, pinpoint potential  
safety problems, and eliminate them by requiring changes in design, operator  
procedures, or control logic. " 41  
Notwithstanding the lack at that time of systematic evaluation proce­dures, many adverse operating events have been "incorporated into the safety  
reviews of new plants, '' 42 as a former NRC chairman noted prior to TMI. This  
process antedates the present-day commercial reactors. For example, a tor­nado that knocked out all offsite power lines to the Dresden I reactor in the  
early 1960s led to the use of small diesel generators to provide onsite emer­gency power - a requirement that evolved into much larger diesels to drive  
safety systems such as the ECCS. 43 More recently, operating experience has  
arguably become the single largest source of new regulatory requirements. For  
example, ''Fire had been recognized as a potential safety concern of consider­able importance for at least a decade before occurrence of the Browns Ferry fire  
in 1975, " 44 but requirements for cable loading and fire retardancy were  
upgraded only after serious fires at San Onofre ( 1967) and Indian Point ( 1971),  
and the Browns Ferry fire was the catalyst for major improvements in cable  
separation and ventilation systems at new plants.  
Operating experience has also been cited as the impetus, at least in part,  
for many Regulatory Guides (see box). Many other guides do not specifically  
mention operating experience but have also originated from adverse occur­rences. They include guides relating to reactor coolant pump flywheel integrity  
(RG I. 14), protection against pipe whip inside containment (RG 1.46), loose­part detection systems for the reactor primary system (RG 1.133), and many  
guides concerning quality assurance in component fabrication and plant con­struction.  
Commercial reactor operating experience continues to increase rapidly.  
The total more than tripled from 140 unit-years at the end of 1975 to 430 at the  
end of 1980, providing much new fodder for more stringent standards (see  
box). Some of these problem areas have been incorporated into NRC's roster  
56 Chapter 3 Regulatory Guides Citing Operating Experience  
(partial listing)  
Number Date* Title  
1.6 3/71 Independence Between Redundant Standby  
Power Sources  
1.31 8/72 Control of Ferrite Content in Stainless Steel Welds  
1.43 5/73 Control of Stainless Steel Weld Cladding of  
Low-Alloy Steel Components  
1.44 5/73 Control of the Use of Sensitized Stainless Steel  
1.47 5/73 Bypassed and Inoperable Status Indication for Safety  
Systems  
1.55 6(73 Concrete Placement in Category I Structures  
1.67 10/73 Installation of Overpressure Protection Devices  
1.68.2 1{77 Initial Startup Test Program to Demonstrate Remote  
Shutdown Capability  
1.96 5/15 Design of Main Steam Isolation Valve Leakage  
Control Systems for BWRs  
1.!15 3/76 Protection Against Low-Trajectory Turbine Missiles  
1.120 6176 Fire Protection Guidelines  
*Most Regulatory Guides are effectively incorporated into the regulatory review  
process prior to their official publication.  
of unresolved safety issues now receiving increased regulatory attention as  
areas of generic safety concern (e.g., systems interaction, water hammer,  
residual heat removal). Others have been the subject of NRC Bulletins and  
Circulars requiring analysis or remedial action by licensees (e.g., loss of  
high-pressure coolant injection, feedwater weld cracks). The Three Mile  
Island accident, of course, has "introduced a large number of new or previ­ously non-emphasized generic safety issues"45 while provoking a sweeping  
reappraisal of safety regulation transcending the specific design and equipment  
inadequacies that contributed to the accidept.b  
b. Interestingly, the most important specific issue stemming from the Three Mile Island  
Chapter3 57 58  
Adverse Events From Reactor Operating Experience,  
1976-1979*  
Serious Events At Individual Reactors  
Faulty test procedures eliminating capability to detect a loss-of­coolant-accident (Zion, 1977)  
Deep circumferential crack in primary system piping (Duane  
Arnold, 1978)  
Loss-of-coolant accident (Three Mile Island, 1979)  
Classes of Events With Multiple Occurrences  
Separation of control rods from drive mechanisms at BWRs  
DC electrical failures degrading the capability of residual heat  
removal systems yet requiring their operation  
Water hammer and flow-induced vibration causing equipment  
damage, in some cases to engineered safety features  
Systems interaction events compromising independence between  
presumed redundant safety systems (e.g .. Zion event above)  
Loss of high-pressure coolant injection (HPCI) capability, due to  
valve leakage, improper valve lineup, or electrical failure  
Leakage between interconnected fl. uid systems causing loss of  
residual heat removal systems  
Failure to maintain containment isolation  
Cracks in welds connecting feed water piping to steam generators at  
PWRs  
Continued degradation of steam-generator tubes and cracking in  
steam-generator supports at PWRs  
Overpressurization of pressure vessels at PWRs  
*Compiled from ACRS, Review of Licensee Event Reports. 1976·1978. NUREG·  
0572 ( I 979).  
Chapter3 Section 3.7: The Role Of The Public In Forcing Stronger  
Safety Standards  
Public concern over nuclear power hazards has grown as the nuclear  
sector has expanded. Increased operating experience has generated additional  
evidence of actual hazards, while the construction of more nuclear capacity at  
more sites has enlarged the numbers of people exposed to reactor risks. In turn,  
rising public apprehension has affected nuclear regulation.  
Although citizen interventions have been blamed for causing delays  
leading to higher costs, that effect was statistically negligible in terms of real  
· (inflation-adjusted) dollars for reactors completed in the 1970s. Most delays  
caused by citizen challenges have affected reactor licensing rather than con­struction, and reactors which took longer to license did not have inordinately  
higher capital costs than plants starting construction at the same time, as  
Section 8.1 shows. Far more importantly, public concern has spawned expert  
critics who have identified deficiencies in reactor design, construction, and  
regulation. Public involvement in nuclear regulation has also reinforced con­servative tendencies among regulators.  
The foremost technically-skilled critic of reactor regulation has been the  
Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS). UCS was founded in 1969 to examine  
science and technology policy but soon turned primarily to reactor safety in  
response to prompting by its members and funders. The group was in the  
forefront of intervenors at licensing hearings who attacked AEC 's 1971 ECCS  
interim criteria. These challenges helped to force the lengthy rulemaking that  
led AEC in late 1973 to reduce permissible fuel temperatures and to prod the  
industry to improve ECCS reliability. At least as importantly, the hearings  
revealed the presence of dissent within AEC and thereby conferred both  
publicity and legitimacy upon nuclear critics.  
UCS's continued critiques of nuclear regulation have both affected  
specific issue areas and colored the overall tone of the reactor safety debate.  
Criticism by UCS was cited for its "important contribution" to a 1980 NRC  
order upgrading standards governing fire protection for electrical cables and  
environmental qualification of electrical components. 46 The group's critiques  
of the Reactor Safety Study (WASH-1400) also helped induce Congress to  
direct NRC to convene a committee to review the study. That review led the  
Commission to retract some of its prior support for the study, an action with  
important consequences for safety regulation, as discussed below.  
Intervenors have sometimes brought about design changes in individual  
licensing hearings. At North Anna, for example, a local environmental group  
accident - measures to cope with a molten reactor core was raised several years earlier,  
although not to its current prominence, in licensing reviews of another new design. that of a  
floating nuclear plant.  
Chapter3 59 showed that building supports were settling into the ground, causing NRC to  
order tests and design changes (primarily flexible expansion coupling for  
piping) that added to costs and delayed plant completion. 4 7 More generally,  
intervenor participation in licensing hearings has tended to make the regulat­ory staff' 'considerably more cautious and conservative,' <4S according to one  
observer, by fostering a climate conducive to detailed design review. The  
prospect of intervenor cross-examination has encouraged applicant and staff  
witnesses to conduct thorough safety analyses. Similarly, the presence of  
intervenors tends to reinforce staff concerns with safety and help counteract  
pressure from the applicant for a speedy review.  
Public concern about reactor safety has also reinforced the tendency of  
regulators to heed the potential for nuclear hazards and thus to add safety  
requirements designed to limit the overall accident probability. For example,  
The ACRS believes that it is proper that nuclear power be safer than other  
comparable technologies. The Committee has sought this goal. It believes  
that the country wants a higher level of safety for nuclear reactors and is  
wil!ing to pay for it. The ACRS also believes that the country wants a  
higher degree of assurance as to the level of safety which is being at­tained. 49  
Statements such as these are a powerful counterweight to the view that dif­ferent energy sour;:;es should have comparable risks, and that nuclear power,  
with a lower calculated public health impact than some alternatives, should  
therefore not be subject to further major regulatory requirements. The state­ment arguably would not have been delivered absent considerable public  
apprehension over reactor hazards.  
Public concern has also affected nuclear regulation through Congress.  
Although few members of Congress are strongly anti-nuclear, constituents'  
concerns have led to closer congressional oversight and thence to stricter  
regulation. In 1977, for example, the chairman of the House Subcommittee on  
Energy and Environment, Rep. Morris K. Udall, succeeded in attaching a rider  
to an NRC appropriations bill creating a panel of reactor safety experts to  
review the Reactor Safety Study. The experts' critical review 5° led to an NRC  
policy statement in early 1979 withdrawing support for the study's executive  
summary and restricting staff's use of the study's accident probabilit­ies. 51 The first move has bolstered arguments for stronger regulatory stan­dards, while the second may lead to more conservative design bases in specific  
licensing issues.  
Congress has also required NRC to publish digests of reactor • 'abnormal  
occurrences,'' lists of unresolved safety issues, and Task Action Plans to  
address key safety concerns. These have raised NRC's priorities for resolving  
safety problems and thereby enhanced stricter regulation. Moreover, publica­tion of the information has deepened the sense among a large segment of the  
60 Chapter3 public that reactors present many potential safety hazards warranting greater  
attention. In turn, heightened concern has affected the regulatory process  
through the conduits previously described.  
The entire nuclear enterprise, in fact, has been conducted increasingly in  
a "fishbowl" environment that admits scrutiny of every aspect of nuclear  
regulation and operation. Operating anomalies are fed back into design and  
operating reviews; designs are examined in NRC staff reviews and licensing  
hearings; construction is scrutinized by activists, the press, NRC and, increas­ingly, by workers themselves.  
The latter development was first evidenced in 1971, when a welding  
supervisor at the Surry plant reported that primary coolant piping contained  
numerous defective welds. The following year, an anonymous letter to the  
ACRS, perhaps sent by a reactor design engineer, disclosed that postulated  
steam-line breaks at the Prairie Island reactors could cause pressure to rise in  
the auxiliary building to the point that vital electrical and mechanical equip­ment might fail and impede plant shutdown. Neither the applicant nor AEC  
staff had evaluated this issue in their reviews. 52 The AEC responded by  
requiring many plants under construction and in design to conduct further  
accident analyses, reroute pipes, and modify their auxiliary buildings to  
provide pressure relief in the event of steam-line failure. 53  
More recently, "heightened public awareness and interest in nuclear  
power [have] resulted in an increase in the number of allegations received by  
NRC" 54 of irregularities in plant construction. Since 1977, construction  
personnel at the Callaway, WolfCreek, South Texas, and Marble Hill reactors  
have charged that quality assurance requirements were being bypassed and that  
designs were being amended in the field by unqualified personnel. These  
allegations and a critique of NRC construction inspection procedures by the  
General Accounting Office (GA0) 55 have Jed the agency to toughen its super­vision of construction. At Marble Hill, for example, workers' affidavits led to  
the discovery of I 70 inadequate patching jobs in concrete walls - including  
voids up to J 80 cubic feet in size56 - and to an NRC suspension of safety­related construction lasting more than a year and a half. NRC has subsequently  
announced its intention to consider new rules to enhance the independence of  
QA auditors from construction personnel and to expand its own inspections of  
reactor construction activities. 57  
Section 3.8: Outlook  
The preceding discussion indicates that considerable impetus for new  
reactor safety requirements in the United States has come from expansion of  
the nuclear sector, i.e., from increases in the total capacity of reactors operat­ing or under construction. Growth in the population of reactors has required  
Chapter3 61 new licensing reviews in which additional safety problems were first dis­covered or addressed. It has led to a more rigid administration of licensing  
standards and procedures that has raised the stringency and specificity of safety  
requirements applied in staff reviews. It has also induced regulators generally  
to endeavor to reduce per-plant risks to contain the industry-wide probability  
of a serious accident.  
Similarly, increases in reactor generating capacities - which together  
with reactor population determine sector size - have necessitated greater  
safeguards in order to maintain desired safety margins. And increased operat­ing experience, which to date has correlated closely with the number of plants,  
has unearthed new safety defects requiring remedial regulatory action.  
Nuclear sector expansion has also broadened and intensified public  
concern. The increasing number of plants have generated more frequent  
mishaps which, with more persons living near more reactors, are accorded  
wider publicity that in turn adds to pressure on regulators to abate perceived  
hazards. The "fishbowl" environment in which nuclear power must function  
was not present when only a dozen reactors were operating or planned. Rather,  
it materialized as the concomitant of a largescale nuclear program undertaken  
prior to achieving sufficient technical and managerial maturity.  
This is not to say that all of the ingredients that have contributed to  
increased regulatory stringency are subsumed under nuclear sector expansion.  
Some information leading to more stringent requirements has come from  
accident-related research by the national laboratories; for example, work at the  
Idaho National Reactor Testing Station in the early 1970s indicated that ECCS  
cooling water might not reach the reactor core in some circumstances. (Note,  
however, that much accident research has been ordered by AEC/NRC in  
response to new pressures or information originating from the various sources  
described earlier.)  
Separately, although it is likely that increases in the prices of competing  
energy forms such as coal help create a context in which cost-engendering new  
requirements are more palatable to nuclear regulators, this factor is not tied to  
expansion of the nuclear sector. Nor are the regulators' own opinions as to the  
importance of nuclear power, or those of the president, who appoints the NRC  
commissioners and can seek to influence their conduct of regulatory policy.  
Conversely, those responsible for nuclear regulation have generally under­stood that a serious reactor accident - an event whose probability of occur­rence must be proportional to nuclear sector size, absent safety improvements  
could spell the end of nuclear power in the United States. This consideration  
has been reinforced by the Three Mile Island accident.  
Accordingly, the linkage of increased regulatory stringency to nuclear  
sector expansion seems firmly based in both regulatory history and logic. Most  
of the drive toward greater regulatory requirements appears accounted for  
by: (I) the need to improve new plants' safety to keep the sector-wide acci­62 Chapter 3 dent frequency at a low level, (2) information concerning safety problems that  
arises from licensing reviews and plant operation, and (3) the more rigid  
administration of regulation necessary to license and monitor a large nuclear  
sector that draws public concern and scrutiny.  
This linkage implies that the approximately 90 gigawatts of nuclear  
capacity under construction face a significant further increase in regulatory  
standards. These plants long ago gave impetus to new regulations when they  
were awarded construction permits in the 1970s, signalling to regulators the  
need for new remedial measures to prevent increases in the sector-wide pro­bability of a serious accident. In theory, the impetus could be defused if public  
attitudes toward nuclear risks change substantially or if it proves possible to  
dismiss outstanding regulatory issues without affecting accident risks. Neither  
event seems plausible, however. The growing number of genuine safety issues  
and the continued widespread mistrust of nuclear power strengthen the pre­sumption that nuclear regulation will grow more stringent.  
The one eventuality that might be expected to slow the rate of increase in  
nuclear regulations is cancellation of a large number of reactors with construc­tion permits. Large-scale cancellations of plants being built would ease public  
concern and also enable regulators to relax growth in safety requirements  
somewhat without forcing up the sector-wide accident probability. Readjust­ment to reduced future capacity would be constrained, however, by continued  
detection of safety problems through operating experience at existing reac­tors. Indeed, judging from the rate of issuance of NRC generic Bulletins and  
Circulars, the detection rate per reactor apparently reached an all-time high  
during 1979-80 (see Figure 5. I). Major problems detected in 1979-80 include  
the many systemic deficiencies in design and operation revealed at Three Mile  
Island, weaknesses in BWR scram systems, inadequate separation of non­safety from safety-grade instrumentation and control systems at Babcock &  
Wilcox reactors, substandard seismic design and construction procedures, and  
faulty PWR containment water level controls and indicators, among many  
others.  
At some point, the per-reactor rate of detection of safety problems will  
almost certainly decline. But even then, the per-year rate would fall less  
rapidly - and might even continue to increase for some time - because of  
growth in the number of operating plants. New safety issues will thus con­tinually emerge while old ones will be re-emphasized, inhibiting efforts to  
stabilize reactor design criteria and to standardize plants. Moreover, apart  
from prospective new standards, plants under construction are subject to many  
existing requirements from which recently completed plants were exempt, due  
to "regulatory lag."  
Accordingly, the "environment of constant change" 58 that so perva­sively complicates nuclear design and construction should not be expected to  
improve significantly, short of a marked reduction in currently projected  
nuclear power growth. Such a slowdown would ease, but by no means com­Chapter 3 63 pletely dispel, the pressures that lead to new regulatory requirements.  
References  
I. See Department of Energy. U.S. Central Station Nuclear Electric Generating Units:  
Sign(ficant Milestones. DOE/NE-0030 (quarterly).  
2. See LC. Bupp and J.C. Derian, Light Water (Basic Books, New York, 1978); and R.  
Perry er a/., Development and Commercialization of the Light Water Reactor, /946-1976  
(RAND. Santa Monica, CA, R-2180-NSF, 1977).  
3. A.M. Weinberg, The Wilson Quarterly. Ill, 3, 96 ( 1979). Emphasis in original.  
4. SeeS. Lawroski and D. W. Moeller. "Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards: Its  
Role in Nuclear Safety," Nuclear Safety. 20 (No.4), 387-399 ( 1979).  
5. ACRS Chairman W.D. Manly, letterto AECChairrnan Glenn T. Seaberg. 24 Novem­ber 1965. Reprinted in Joint Committee on Atomic Energy (JCAE), Hearings on Licensing and  
Regulation of Nuclear Reactors, 1.961, p. 119.  
6. D. Okrent, Nuclear Reactor Safety: On The History of the Regulatory Process (Univer­sity of Wisconsin Press. Madison, WI, 1981), p.218. This major work by long-time (1963·  
present) ACRS member Okrent arrived in galley form just before this chapter went to press.  
7. W. K. Erg en eta/., "Report of the Advisory Task Force on Power Reactor Emergency  
Cooling,'' AEC (unnumbered), October 1967.  
8. ACRS Chairmen N.J. Palladino ( 1967) and D. Okrent (1966), statement before the  
JCAE, 5 April 1967, in Reference 5, JCAE. p. 93.  
9. ACRS Chairrnen S.H. Bush ( 1971) and J .M. Hendrie ( 1970), statement before JCAE.  
22 June 1971. reprinted in JCAE, Hearings on AEC Licensing Procedure and Related Legis/a·  
lion, 1971, p. 97.  
10. ACRS Chairman H.G. Mangelsdorf, letter to AEC Chairwoman D.L. Ray, 10  
September 1973.  
II. AEC, Technical Report on Anticipated Transients Without Scram for Water-Cooled  
Power Reactors, WASH-1270, September 1973, p. 6.  
12. Reference II, p. 7 (emphasis added).  
13. NRC, Regulatory Guide 1.96, "Design of Main Steam Isolation Valve Leakage  
Control Systems for Boiling Water Reactor Nuclear Power Plants," May 1975, p. 2.  
14. NRC, "Proposed Rulemaking to Amend 10 CFR Part 50 Concerning ATWS  
Events," memorandum SECY-80-409, 4 September 1980, p. A-9.  
15. AEC Deputy Director of Regulation C.K. Beck, statement toJCAE, 5 Apri11967, in  
Reference 5. JCAE. p. 64.  
16. Reference 8, p. 95 (emphasis added).  
17. ACRS, minutes of73rd meeting, 5-7 May 1966.  
18. Reference6,p. 346.  
19. D. Okrent, draft letter to AEC Chairrnan G .T. Seaborg, 16 August !966.  
20. Reference 6, p. 117.  
64 Chapter3 21. Reference4, pp. 391-392.  
22. ACRS, Report on Browns Ferry Nuclear Power Station. 14 March 1967. p. 2.  
23. Published as 10 CFR 50. Appendix A. in 197 I after a revised draft was issued in 1967.  
24. Electrical World. 187 (No.6). 76 ( 1977).  
25. NRC, A Study of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission Quality Assurance Program,  
NUREG-0321. Sandia Laboratories ( 1977). p. 22.  
26. Reference 15. p. 68.  
27. Reference 6. p. 237.  
28. Reference 6. pp. 237-238.  
29. Reference 6, pp. 236-243.  
30. Reference 6. p. 215.  
31. Reference6, pp. 214-215.  
32. See ACRS. "Report on Connecticut Yankee Atomic Power Company," 19 February  
1964; and ACRS Chairman H.J. Kouts.letter to G.T. Seaborg, 18 November 1964.  
33. Reference 6, pp. 230-231.  
34. See NRC, Approved Task Action Plans for Category A Generic Activities, NUREG­0371. Vol. I. No. I (1977), Technical Activities A-6, A-7 and A-8, for a description of the  
pressure-suppression issue. See Commonwealth Edison, Docket Nos. 50-373 and 50-374, letter  
to Chief Olan Parr. NRC LWR Branch No. 3, Division of Project Management. 19 February  
I 980, for an account of design changes at a Mark II plant.  
35. Reference 34, NUREG-0371, Technical Activity A-2, p. I.  
36. E. W. Hagen, "IEEE Nuclear Power Systems Symposium," Nuclear Safety, 16 (No.  
5) 561 (1975).  
37. Reference 8. p. 92.  
38. Reference 8, pp. 92-93.  
39. N.J. Palladino, memorandum to ACRS. 22 November 1965.  
40. NRC, Nuclear Power Plant Licensing: Opportunities for Improvement, NUREG­0292 (1977). p. 3-3.  
41. M. Rogovin, Three Mile Island: A Report to the Commissioners and to the Public.  
NRC. NUREG/CR-1250 ( 1980), VoL I, p. 95.  
42. J.M. Hendrie, testimony before the House Subcommittee on Energy and the Environ­ment, 26 February 1979.  
43. Reference 6, p. 215.  
44. Reference 6, p. 331.  
45. Reference 6, p. 294.  
46. NRC, memorandum and orderCL!-80-21. 27 May 1980. p. 3.  
47. ACRS, report of26 October 1976 on North Anna I and 2.  
48. E.S. Rolph. Nuclear Power and the Public Safety (Lexington Books. Lexington.  
MA. 1979), p. 124.  
Chapter3 65 49. ACRS Chairman M.W. Carbon, letter to NRC Chairman J. Ahearne. II December  
1979.  
50. H. W. Lewis, eta/., Report oft he Risk Assessment Review Group. NUREG/CR-0400  
( 1978).  
51. NRC, ''Statement on Risk Assessment and the Reactor Safety Study Report (WASH­1400) in Light of the Risk Assessment Review Group Report." 18 January 1979.  
52. Reference 6, p. 234.  
53. I. C. Bupp eta/., Trends in Light Water Reactor Capital Costs in the United States:  
Causes and Consequences. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. CPA 74-8 ( 1974), p. !11-10.  
54. NRC. 1979 Annual Report. NUREG-0690, p. 168.  
55. General Accounting Office, The Nuclear Regulatory Commission Needs to Aggres·  
sively Monitor And Independently Evaluate Nuclear Powerplant Construction. EMD-78-80. 7  
September 1978.  
56. Wall Street Joumal, 24 October 1979.  
57. NRC, NRC Action Plan Developed as a Result of the TMI-2 Accident. NUREG-0660,  
Vol. L Section ll.J.  
58. See Chapter 4. Reference 6.  
66 Chapter3 4  
Changes In Reactor Desigat  
And Construction  
In The 1970s  
The real cost (in constant "steam-plant" dollars per kilowatt) to com­plete nuclear power plants in the United States increased by an almost incred­ible amount - 142% - from the end of 1971 to the end of 1978. This  
escalation occurred even after allowing for inflation in the costs of standard  
construction inputs -labor, materials, and equipment. It is documented in the  
analysis of the costs of the 46 U.S. reactors completed during 1972-78 found in  
Chapters 8 and 10.  
The cost increase cannot be explained by changes in the average size,  
geographical location or builder experience of the reactors, since these  
changes had only modest effects on costs. Indeed, some of the changes led to  
reductions in cost, as Table 10.4 shows. Nor is it attributable to lengthening  
reactor construction times, since that average grew by only one year, from 5 V,  
years for a typical 1971 completion to 6'h years in 1978, adding only several  
percent to real capital costs. Nor did citizen interventions materially affect  
costs by causing delays: where citizen challenges were effective, they delayed  
reactor licensing, not construction; reactors which took longer to gain a  
construction permit did not have higher real costs than plants licensed at the  
same time.  
The elimination of construction inflation, lengthened schedules, and  
factors such as increased plant size as possible causal factors leaves only one  
plausible explanation for the 142% average real capital cost increase for  
nuclear plants from 1971 to 1978: design and construction changes that in­creased the amounts of labor, materials, equipment, and engineering effort  
required to build reacto;s, Some fraction of this increase was invested in design  
or equipment changes to improve plant generating performance (capacity  
factor), as discussed below. But most of it appears to have resulted from the  
effort to reduce the safety and environmental risks of newer reactors.  
The previous chapter traced the processes by which nuclear design  
requirements and regulatory standards have grown increasingly stringent since  
the late 1960s. This chapter describes the major changes in nuclear design,  
Chapter4 67 construction, and procurement practices that led to increased costs. It gives  
particular emphasis to the new regulatory standards that appear to have been  
responsible for most of the changed practices."  
The discussion that follows contains few estimates of the costs of com­plying with new regulations on an individual basis. This is in marked contrast  
to the itemization of coal plant regulatory standards in Chapter 7. Those  
standards were clearly responsible for almost all of the real increases in coal  
capital costs in the 1970s. Most coal pollution controls are upgraded by adding  
discrete equipment whose costs can be isolated. Nuclear design changes. in  
contrast, are characterized by "ripple effects" that carry beyond the im­mediate component or system being altered. As the Atomic Industrial Forum  
{AIF) noted in a 1978 analysis of nuclear regulatory impacts,  
[I]t is insufficient to identify the cost of material and labor as, for example,  
an added pipe, or pump or valve ... [S]ignificant ripples caused by such  
changes affected not just the changed system but also, for example,  
supporting structures, norma! or emergency power supplies, ventilation  
systems, radwaste, etc.'  
Or, as British economist Gordon MacKerron reported,  
{S]ystem designs change in response to new standards, rather than simply  
involving the simple addition of discrete safety or environmental features  
to otherwise unchanged designs. 2  
Thus, according to AIF, "Attempts have been made on numerous occa­sions to pinpoint the full impact of regulatory changes on a nuclear project, and  
in each case it was found that the total impact was inevitably larger than the  
sum of the pans. " 3 One such attempt by Ebasco Services, an architect­engineering firm that has developed detailed cost estimates for pollution  
control improvements at coal plants,h was able only to rank AEC/NRC regula­tory guides according to relative cost impact. Specific cost estimates could not  
be made because most regulatory guides " ... have, in addition to [a] direct  
effect on singular systems or structures, an effect on other related systems and  
structures. " 4  
a. The responsibility of nuclear regulation for costly nuclear design changes is a complex  
and controversial ma!ter. NRC and others contend that considerations of reactor safety would  
have required that industry apply stricter standards even in the absence of federal regulation, and,  
moreover. that the nuclear industry has compounded regulatory impacts by contesting and  
resisting new standards instead of designing for them. For its part. the industry is critical of  
alleged NRC regulatory delays and inconsistent rulings. Both arguments have substantial validity  
and are compatible. Neither detracts from this book's contention that increased regulatory  
standards have created the conditions for higher real nuclear capital costs.  
b. These estimates are. unfortunately. presented without correction for inflation. They  
are referenced in Chapter 7.  
68 Chapter4 Accordingly, this chapter addresses past changes in regulatory standards  
and their effects on plant design and construction while presenting few cost  
estimates. The first three sections treat problems of plant construction under  
changing designs, changes in quality assurance practices, and new equipment  
qualification procedures designed to ensure that vital equipment can function  
under extreme conditions. The next three sections treat changes in protective  
measures against specific accident initiators: "internally initiated" accidents  
involving pipe rupture, "missile" generation, or crane failure; seismic and  
other natural phenomena; and fires. The final four sections concern the effects  
of these measures and of other design and equipment changes upon the four  
major nuclear plant systems: "fluid systems" comprising reactor core cooling  
and emergency cooling equipment; the containment structure and systems;  
instrumentation, control, and electric power systems; and equipment to mini­mize radiation releases and exposures.  
The changes were extensive. Major plant structures were strengthened  
and additional piping restraints were installed to absorb seismic shocks and  
other postulated "loads" identified in accident analyses. Barriers were in­stalled and separation distances increased to protect redundant "trains" of  
safety-related equipment from fires, flooding, and other "common-mode"  
failuresc and to shield vital equipment from high-speed missile fragments that  
might be loosed from rotating machinery and from the pressure, steam, and  
fluid effects of possible pipe ruptures (including movement of the pipes  
themselves). Instrumentation, control, and power systems were expanded to  
monitor more plant parameters under a broadened range of operating con­ditions and to improve the reliability of safety systems. And many valves,  
pumps, electrical connectors, and other components considered important to  
safety were' 'qualified" to perform under more demanding conditions, such as  
seismic shocks and loss-of-coolant accidents; this required more rigorous  
fabrication, testing, and documentation of their manufacturing history.  
Changes such as these approximately doubled the amounts of materials  
and equipment required per unit of nuclear capacity during the I970s5 and  
subjected many construction commodities to large increases in real cost.  
Moreover, many changes were mandated during construction, as new informa­tion relevant to safety emerged. This complicated the evolution of designs and  
standards as nuclear technology developed. Reactors increasingly were built in  
an' 'environment of constant change" 6 that precluded control or even estima­tion of costs and spawned endemic inefficiency in design and construction.  
Compared to early-1970s completions, reactors completed in the late seventies  
c. A "train .. or "division"' comprises all of the equipment in one of the two. three. or  
four parallel sets that comprise a complete system. A "common-mode" failure is the concurrent  
failure of identical redundant components or equipment trains. It can occur because of shared  
defects in the fabrication or installation of equipment. "environmental" conditions such as high  
humidity, or operator error. Common-mode failures are of concern because of their potential to  
overcome redundancy in safety syJtems.  
Chapter4 69 required approximately twice as much craft labor and two-thirds more  
engineering effort per unit of capacity. These increases together added ap­proximately $150/kW ( 1979 dollars) to plant costs, 7 accounting for one-third  
of the overall direct increase in reactor capital costs during 1971-78  
(exclusive of real interest during construction).  
Section 4.1: Construction Under Changing Standards  
Reactor designs and regulatory requirements changed markedly in the  
1970s, not only from one generation of plants to the next but also between  
preliminary and final design for each plant, as later sections of this chapter  
demonstrate. The result was that the nuclear construction process fell prey to  
logistical problems that magnified the direct impacts of increased standards.  
These problems continue today. Construction contracts must be let on a  
"cost-plus" basis, craft workers are inefficiently deployed and labor produc­tivity suffers, backfits during construction are common, and opportunities for  
innovation or learning from prior construction are narrowed.  
Cost-Plus Contracting: "[Because] the work scope at the beginning of  
a nuclear project cannot be accurately defined to accommodate the seven or  
e;ght year construction span the industry is now facing," said Pacific Gas &  
Electric (PG&E) in explaining cost overruns at its Diablo Canyon plant, "it is  
not uncommon to have all [construction] work awarded from the beginning on  
a cost-plus basis.' ' 
8 Standard construction contracts provide for a fixed price,  
perhaps tied to an agreed inflation index. Such arrangements are not feasible,  
however, when the scope of work is subject to significant changes after the  
contract is let.  
Instead, "recoverable cost-plus" contracts are the norm in safety­related nuclear work. Or, fixed-price arrangements may be changed to cost­plus when a contractor is overwhelmed by design or specification changes and  
the architect-engineer cannot change contractors or put the revisions out for  
bids without incurring even greater costs or causing damaging delays. In the  
process, the architect-engineer sacrifices control over contractor expenditures.  
In the same way, the utility loses control over the architect-engineer.  
A measure of the impact of cost-plus contracts on nuclear costs is  
provided by Christopher Bassett's analysis of Toledo Edison's Davis-Besse  
plant, completed in 1977. 9 Bassett, a cost engineer for the Ohio Public Utilities  
Commission, found that the costs of major equipment items procured from  
vendors for a fixed amount were only slightly higher than the initial contract  
awards. The cost of the nuclear steam supply system went from $34 million to  
$40 million, and the turbine-generator from $22 million to $24 million. In  
contrast, massive overruns were experienced for tasks involving field con­struction and the purchase of the myriad of other components that were  
70 Chapter4 particularly sensitive to the effects of regulatory changes and, thus, were  
negotiated on a cost-plus basis. Piping and mechanical work at Davis-Besse  
increased from $15 million to $80 million, civil and structural from $11  
million to $67 million, and electrical from $5 million to $44 million  
increases of 440%, 510%, and 780%, respectively.  
A large part of these increases was doubtless caused by the direct  
equipment and engineering costs of the design changes, and would have been  
incurred under any type of contract. Nevertheless, the cost-plus arrangement  
almost certainly added to the direct costs. A fixed-price arrangement creates  
incentives to work efficiently and expeditiously to maximize the contractor's  
profit. The objective under cost-plus contracts is to maximize total revenues,  
which shifts the prevailing orientation toward longer schedules and greater  
expenditures.  
Labor Productivity: Constant changes,in designs and construction pro­cedures cause inefficient deployment of construction labor for many reasons.  
First, scope changes lead to frustrating start-and-stop work conditions. New  
design requirements frequently hold up fabrication and delivery of key com­ponents and require altering construction sequences, and '"the continuing  
redefinition of engineering detail ... requires work stoppages while changes  
are made." 10 These changes and delays confuse and demoralize workers,  
compounding cost-plus incentives and creating an environment which dis­courages attentiveness.  
Second, scope changes breed negative expectations about the outcome of  
work that invariably reduce productivity. Changed requirements sometimes  
cause equipment installation and field erection to be repeated several times.  
leading workers to be less careful since they come to anticipate that jobs will be  
redone anyway. Careless work then forces inspectors to reject jobs, requiring  
that they be redone and completing the vicious circle.  
Increasing quality assurance requirements have contributed to lower  
productivity in much the same way: by raising the care and time required for  
some construction; by increasing job-rejection rates; by adding to delays in  
delivery of equipment; and by necessitating an expansion of supervisory staff,  
compounding the increase in personnel required to manage construction under  
design and engineering changes.  
Backfitting: Design changes during construction not only dampen  
labor productivity but also may affect work already in place. When installed  
equipment fails new standards and must be modified or removed, adjacently  
located equipment may need to be moved to accommodate the change. ''There  
are significant inefficiencies in trying to design to fit existing buildings and  
installed components." says PG&E. 11 "Work has to be done out of sequence  
in a restricted access and work area. "  
Existing installations must also be protected from construction hazards  
Chapter4 71 and occasionally may be damaged. Moreover, contractors previously released  
from the site may need to be recalled, creating additional inefficiencies as new  
work forces are assembled and trained.  
Overall Construction Logistics: Constructing a modern power plant is  
a mammoth task. It requires several thousand workers to assemble thousands  
of equipment items using many thousands of engineering drawings over a  
multi-year period. The overall management task would be complex even under  
ideal circumstances, but it is made more difficult by design and regulatory  
changes.  
The ''expectation of design changes'' described by the Atomic Industrial  
Forum (AIF) 12 forces the architect-engineer to choose between deferring  
construction tasks until new design requirements are issued or "over-design­ing" jobs to satisfy anticipated regulations. The former strategy often causes  
delays, especially when critical engineering is being deferred. But the latter  
approach increases direct costs, not only of the job in question but also of  
supporting tasks such as structures, piping, cables, and ventilation.  
Morevover, management skills which might otherwise be marshalled to  
improve efficiency and trim costs are instead absorbed by the effort of coping  
with changing designs and new regulations. The statistical analysis of past  
nuclear costs in Chapter 8 indicates that' 'learning'' by architect-engineers has  
proceeded slowly in nuclear power construction; each doubling in the number  
of plants built by an architect-engineer has effected only a 7% average drop in  
costs. This pace is considerably slower than in other young industries, pro­bably because of the lack of design stability in nuclear plant construction.  
Finally, innovation in design and construction is often not feasible in the  
heavily regulated nuclear power industry. Designers and construction man­agers often forego potential improvements in favor of less efficient but pre­viously approved methods. In general, with design changes soaking up mana­gerial attention and available capital while potential innovations are closely  
scrutinized for possible risks, nuclear construction has not offered fertile  
ground for new approaches that might cut costs.  
Performance Improvements: Changes in plant designs or equipment to  
improve reactor performance (capacity factor) made a modest contribution to  
real nuclear capital cost increases in the 1970s. Major measures taken at many  
recently completed plants include improved corrosion-resistant materials for  
primary system piping, titanium condensers to reduce contaminant in-leakage  
to steam generators, and increased design margins and parts stocking for some  
equipment.  
Generic cost figures for such measures are not available. Their impacts  
have been mixed, as later reactors appear to show only slight performance  
improvements over earlier units, even controlling for size and age differences.  
Performance trends might have been negative without these efforts, however,  
72 Chapter4 due to the apparently heightened effect of nuclear regulation on reactor per­formance in recent years. This point is pursued in Section II. I.  
Section 4.2: Quality Assurance  
The most vital systems and equipment in nuclear power plants are those  
designed to shut down the fission reaction, maintain reactor cooling, and  
prevent the off-site release of radioactivity. The design, manufacture, and  
installation of such safety-related equipment are subject to quality assurance  
(QA) procedures to ensure that the equipment can perform effectively as  
needed. (A particularly critical aspect of these procedures is equipment quali­fication - testing and documentation to ensure that safety-related equipment  
can function under extreme conditions that may arise during accidents. It is  
discussed in Section 4.3.)  
QA requirements for nuclear power plant construction have expanded  
greatly since the mid- 1960s. Early methods of ensuring quality were largely  
informal, guided by a modest set of codes and standards. Starting in 1970,  
however, a new approach has developed requiring adherence to a great number  
of specific, detailed NRC rules and industry standards. The result was a  
significant increase in direct equipment costs, in procurement and installation  
times, and in logistical complexity in nuclear plant construction.  
Evolution of Quality Assurance Requirements: The AEC/NRC has  
habitually defined quality assurance as "All those planned or systematic  
actions necessary to provide adequate confidence that an item or facility will  
perform satisfactorily in service.'' 13 QA is a management system that  
licensees and their contractors apply to' 'the design, fabrication, erection, and  
testing of structures, systems, and components important to safety," 14 "to  
assure requisite quality and effective performance." 15  
The AEC first published general requirements for quality assurance  
programs as Appendix B to Title lO of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 50  
( 10 CFR 50) in 1970, three years after spelling out the general intent of QA in  
the initial draft of its General Design Criteria for nuclear plants. Also in 1970,  
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) established committees to  
develop formal, explicit procedures for licensees and their contractors to  
comply with the AEC regulations. ANSI is an umbrella organization for  
technical societies such as the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers  
(IEEE) and the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) whose  
memberships have a professional interest in and familiarity with nuclear power  
plants. The ANSI working groups are composed primarily of representatives  
of electric utilities, power plant designers, and equipment manufacturers but  
include nominal AEC/NRC representation.  
Beginning in 1971 and continuing through the 1970s, the ANSI com­Chapter4 73 American National Standards Institute  
Quality Assurance Standards  
Standard Year  
Number Adopted Subject  
N45.2 1971 General QA requirements  
N45.2.l 1973 Cleaning of fluid systems  
N45.2.2 1972 Packaging, shipping, receiving, storage and  
handling of equipment  
N45.2.3 1973 Housekeeping during construction  
N45.2.4 1972 Installation, inspection and testing of  
instrumentation and electric equipment  
N45.2.5 1974 Installation, inspection and testing of  
structural concrete and steel  
N45.2.6 !973 Qualifications of inspection, examination  
and testing personnel  
N45.2.7 1976 Administrative controls for QA  
N45.2.8 1975 Installation, inspection and testing of  
mechanical equipment and systems  
N45.2.9 1974 Collection, storage and maintenance of QA  
records  
N45.2.10 1973 QA terms and definitions  
N45.2. II 1974 QA requirements in plant design  
mittees issued almost two dozen final and draft QA standards pertaining to  
virtually every phase of plant construction involving safety-related equipment.  
These include designing, purchasing, fabricating, handling, shipping, storing,  
cleaning, erecting, installing, inspecting, and testing (see box). All the final  
and most of the draft standards have been endorsed in AEC/NRC regulatory  
guides.  
Quality Assurance Standards: Some ANSI standards are essentially  
lengthy lists of procedures for different construction phases. Others delineate  
precise methods to be employed in specific construction procedures. It is  
beyond our scope to review each standard, but several examples can illustrate  
their pervasive impact on construction practices.  
ANSI Standard (Std) N45.2.8, issued in 1975, gives requirements for  
installing and assembling safety-related mechanical items such as valves,  
74 Chapter4 N45.2.12  
N45.2.13  
1977 Requirements for auditing QA programs  
1976 Procurement of items and services  
N45.2.14 (pending) Manufacture of safety-related  
instrumentation and electric equipment  
N45.2.15 (pending) Hoisting, rigging and transportation of  
equipment  
N45 .2. 16 1975 Calibration and control of measuring and test  
equipment  
N45.2.17 (see note) Welding  
N45.2.18 (see note) Installation, inspection and testing of  
concrete  
N45.2.19  
N45.2.20  
N45.2.21  
N45.2.22  
N45.2.23  
(see note) Requirements for soil and foundations  
1979 Requirements for subsurface investigations  
(see note) Design and manufacture of nuclear fuel  
(pending) Inspection of dimensional characteristics  
1978 Qualification of audit personnel  
Notes: Standards 17, 19, and 21 were withdrawn prior to adop­tion. Standard 18 was absorbed into Standard 5. Standards 14, 15,  
and 22 are currently pending approval. Standards 5 and 9 through  
13 were re-issued in 1979 as NQA-1, "Quality Assurance Program  
Requirements for Nuclear Power Plants."  
pumps, and piping. Licensees must verify the location and orientation of  
components; their levelling, alignment, clearances, and tolerances; the tight­ness of connections and fastenings; a!! fluid levels and pressures; the absence  
of leakage; the integrity of any welding operations; the adequacy of measures  
to prevent damage from installation or from adjacent construction; and the  
cleanliness of the installation. Following installation, the licensee must check  
greasing and lubrication, equipment cooling water systems, settings for elec­trical circuits and relays, instrumentation calibration, piping alignment, valve  
glands and packing, pump seals and packing, and installation of seismic  
anchors and restraints.  
Other ANSI QA-related standards designate methods required for spe­cific areas of construction such as high-strength bolting. ANSI Std 45.2.5  
( 1974) stipulates that "automatic cut-offimpact wrenches" must be calibrated  
at least twice daily by tightening in a device indicating actual bolt tension,  
Chapter4 75 using at least three typical bolts of each diameter being installed. Post-installa­tion inspection must confirm that bolts are the correct length, as indicated by at  
least two threads extending beyond the nut; that the bolt head shows the correct  
manufacturer's marking; that torque has been applied, as indicated by the  
burnishing or beening of the corners of the nuts; and that turning elements are  
on the correct face. The standard also specifies the procedures for calibrating  
the torque wrenches used to make the inspections.  
These examples pertain to installation, inspection, and testing. QA  
requirements also apply to pre-construction phases such as procurement,  
fabrication, shipping, and storage. NRC regulations require that each safety­related item be inspected, identified, and traceable - through material heat  
number, part number, serial number, mill certification, etc.- throughout its  
fabrication, erection, and installation. In addition, special fabrication and  
installation processes, including welding, heat treating, and non-destructive  
testing, must be performed by certified personnel in accordance with applic­able codes and standards such as the detailed specifications of the American  
Society of Testing and Materials.  
Even protective coatings (i.e., paints) are addressed by QA require­ments. Improperly chosen or applied coatings could come free, clogging flow  
passages in piping systems or impeding heat transfer in heat exchangers, or  
they might cause explosive, free hydrogen to form when they are exposed to  
steam. Two ANSI standards issued in 1972 concern criteria for chemical  
composition and application of paints to plant equipment and surfaces in  
different environments. 16  
NRC QA criteria also apply to plant design. Applicable codes, standards  
and regulations must be "correctly translated into specifications, drawings,  
procedures, and instructions" for each component. 17 This is to be accom­plished by architect-engineer review teams separate from the design group.  
Where necessary, test programs are to be conducted to check that specific  
design features can accomplish their intended function.  
ANSI Std N45.2.11 further requires that the same degree of review be  
applied to design changes as to the original design. Sidney Bernsen, Bechtel's  
QA manager for steam plant construction, contends that "This has severely  
restricted earlier construction practices that allowed field engineers at the  
construction site to initiate and approve rather significant departures from the  
original design.'' 18 Although field personnel with a demonstrated understand­ing of the design area may undertake field changes, it has become increasingly  
common to check changes with the architect-engineer's home office or with  
authorized architect-engineer representatives on-site.  
Documentation: A major part of QA activity is documentation to verify  
that required procedures have been carried out. This includes drawings, speci­fications, procurement documents, quality-program manuals, procedures  
(document-control procedures, installation procedures, inspection proce­76 Chapter4 dures, and personnel qualifications), and documentation providing evidence  
that inspections and tests have been conducted. t9  
The nuclear industry considers the large and growing amounts of paper­work involved in QA documentation to be a major cause of increased nuclear  
costs. Document control ensuring that QA documents are available to  
personnel performing design, construction, or installation o( safety-related  
items - has become especially difficult, particularly with changes in plant  
designs and equipment. According to Bernsen,  
In general, everyone wants to use the applicable (normally the latest)  
documents; however, people are reluctant to part with superseded copies  
of these documents, sometimes because they have recorded important  
information or notes on a given issue of a drawing. Furthermore, the  
transient and fluctuating nature of the work force at a construction site and  
the physical movement of crews from one area of the plant to another make  
it quite difficult to identify the groups having copies of different issues of  
documents. Literally tens of thousands of documents that need control are  
distributed at the jobsite. 20  
One possible solution, deploying crews to distribute documents and mark  
obsolete information, may lead to labor-relations problems and requires con­tinuous attention in any event.  
Applicability of Quality Assurance: QA requirements may appear to be  
pervasive, reaching into every aspect of nuclear construction, but three caveats  
should be kept in mind. First, QA applies only to equipment that the licensee  
designates, subject to NRC review, as "safety-related" (i.e., required to  
achieve safe reactor shutdown, to maintain core cooling, and to contain  
radioactivity releases in the event of postulated accidents). Although licensee  
lists of safety-related equipment have expanded somewhat over time, they still  
comprise only about one-fifth of the volume of total plant equipment at  
recently completed reactors. Such equipment does, however, account for a  
larger share of equipment costs because of the QA process.  
Second, new QA-related standards rarely apply to equipment already  
purchased. Many even apply only to new construction starts, exempting  
equipment yet to be purchased for plants under construction. Third, virtually  
all inspections of licensee and contractor work are by the licensees and  
contractors themselves. NRC auditing consists mostly of reviews of licensees'  
QA paperwork, except for small samplings of reactor field construction and  
installation. NRC displeasure over widespread QA inadequacies may lead to  
more stringent requirements and closer NRC audits, as discussed in Sections  
5. I and 6.3.  
Despite these limitations, QA requirements appear to have had a major  
impact on reactor construction costs and logistics (see box). In addition,  
procedures for ensuring that safety-related equipment will function under  
Chapter4 77 Quality Assurance Documentation At Diablo Canyon  
Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) began construction of its  
two-unit Diablo Canyon station in the late 1960s, but plant start-up  
has been delayed since approximately 1977 due to unresolved  
seismic design issues. In the following excerpted testimony,  
PG&E construction vice-president Donald Brand describes the  
effect of QA requirements upon construction of Diablo Canyon.  
We did not ... anticipate the detail in documentation  
and independent inspection of workmanship which would be  
required by the NRC. For instance, simple field changes to  
avoid physical interference between components (which  
would be made in a conventional plant in the normal course of  
work) had to be documented as an interference, referred to the  
engineer for evaluation, prepared on a drawing, approved,  
and then released to the field before the change could be  
made. Furthermore, the conflict had to be tagged, identified  
and records maintained during the change process. These  
change processes took time (days or weeks) and there were  
thousands of them. In the interim the construction crew must  
move off of this piece of work, set up on another and then  
move back and set up on the original piece of work again when  
the nonconformance was resolved.  
Installation of wire must be done according to written  
procedure and must be documented. Every foot of nuclear  
safety-related wire purchase is accounted for and its exact  
location in the plant is recorded. For each circuit we can tell  
you what kind of wire was used, the names of the installing  
crew, the reel from which it came, the manufacturing test,  
and production history. The tension on the wire when it is  
pulled is recorded and the tensioning device is calibrated on a  
periodic basis.  
None of these requirements were in existence when  
Diablo Canyon was planned. Hundreds of requirements simi­lar to these give us assurance of the quality of the Diablo  
Canyon plant. While this assurance is very costly, a precise  
cost cannot be assigned to this program. 21  
accident conditions have become considerably more demanding, as the next  
section demonstrates.  
78 Chapter4 Section 4.3: Equipment Qualificationd  
Equipment qualification refers to the generation of evidence that a man­ufactured component is capable of performing its intended function under all  
postulated service conditions. These conditions can encompass a wide range:  
normal operation; abnormal status such as degraded voltage or frequency;  
maintenance and testing, both of the component itself and of other parts of the  
plant which may subject the component to unusual service conditions; and  
''design basis events'' such as earthquakes and accidents.  
Demanding Service Conditions: Safety-related equipment may be ex­posed to two kinds of extreme service conditions. The first is process con­ditions. Valves may have to function under unusual flow conditions such as  
high or pulsed flow; motors may have to start and run with abnormal supply  
voltage and frequency if power supplies are degraded; components mounted on  
piping systems may be subjected to unusual vibrations and shocks due to  
hydrodynamic forces in the systems; and maintenance or testing can com­promise ventilation, power supply, heat removal, lubrication, or other support  
systems that are ordinarily fully available.  
Second, extreme environmental conditions may develop due to severe  
natural phenomena such as floods and tornadoes or accidents within the plant.  
Safety-related equipment can be shielded to some extent by locating it in  
suitably designed structures. Consideration of potential tornado forces has led  
to increased wall thickness at later plants, and safety-related equipment within  
plants has increasingly been placed in watertight compartments to protect it  
from water or steam that could issue from ruptured pipes (see Sections 4.4 and  
4.5). This approach does not offer protection from earthquakes, however,  
because seismic disturbances are transmitted by the building to all equipment  
contained inside. Thus, seismic considerations require not only preserving the  
plant's structural integrity but also qualifying vital equipment for seismic  
stress.  
Moreover, even sealed compartments cannot shield all safety-related  
equipment from adverse effects during a postulated loss-of-coolant accident  
(LOCA). Safety-related equipment located within the containment must func­tion while subjected to an environment of high-pressure steam and radioactive  
fission products assumed to be released from the reactor and to deluge sprays  
containing water or caustic solutions designed to scrub radioactive gases. In  
addition, some equipment located in or near lines carrying radioactive fluids,  
such as pumps, valves, motors, and valve operators, may be subjected to a high  
d. Much of this section draws heavily upon original material provided to the author by  
William H. Steigelmann. a specialist in nuclear design and engineering. fonnerly at the Franklin  
Institute in Philadelphia. now director of energy technologies at Synergic Resources Corp .. Bala  
Cy"nwyd. PA.  
Chapter4 79 radiation flux from a LOCA or a large pipe break. Equipment could also be  
exposed to temperatures outside of normal industrial ranges (typically 40- 
1 05°F) if the heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HV A C) system for its  
location is not energized or fails under accident conditions.  
A final environmental consideration for some equipment is that it may be  
called on to function after standing idle during the first days or even weeks  
following an accident. Corrosion and insulation degradation promoted by  
steam, chemical spray, and moisture may be worse in idle equipment than in  
identical equipment that operates immediately after an accident. This too must  
be taken into account in qualifying safety-related equipment.  
IEEE Standards for Equipment Qualification: Electrical equipment is  
vital to the performance of safety systems but is potentially sensitve to extreme  
service conditions. Accordingly, qualification guidelines have been developed  
for electrical equipment, in consensus standards published by the IEEE and  
endorsed by AEC/NRC Regulatory Guides. Recently the American Society of  
Mechanical Engineers has formed committees to write standards for safety­related mechanical equipment valves, pumps, piping, snubbers, etc.- but  
there are as yet no published industry standards directly applicable to these  
specific items.  
The IEEE standards permit proof of performance to be established  
through operating experience, analysis, or test, but testing is the most widely  
used method. Design basis conditions are frequently so different from those to  
which equipment has been subjected in the past that qualification cannot be  
established by citing prior operating experience of identical equipment.  
Similarly, analytical techniques employing methematical models are generally  
neither sufficiently accurate nor broad to predict the effects of all possible  
combinations of conditions during accidents, such as extreme temperatures,  
humidity, and radiation. (This is not the case when qualifying structures, since  
failure modes are less complex and are generally amenable to an analytical  
approach.) Thus, testing of equipment specimens is usually necessary for  
qualification.  
IEEE qualification test requirements were first stated in general terms in  
the 1971 edition of Std 323 (relevant engineering standards and regulatory  
guides are listed at the end of this chapter). The intent was to provide evidence  
that equipment required to operate in the severe environment produced by an  
accident could do so. Samples of electrical cable, motors, sensors, etc. em­ployed in the containment were irradiated and exposed to the same steam and  
chemical spray environment that was predicted to occur in a LOCA.  
Current IEEE standards such as the 1974 edition of Std 323 (endorsed by  
NRC Regulatory Guide !.89) include more specific, stringent regimes incor­porating potential degrading factors such as equipment aging and seismic  
stress. They also require a thorough description of the test facility, instrumen­80 Chapter4 tation, procedures, and results as well as retention of extensive records. In  
addition, some minimum test margins are higher in the later standards.  
For new reactors, qualification tests now apply to all electrical equip­ment needed to shut the reactor, control safeguard systems, and operate vital  
instrumentation and controls. This includes many of the valves, motors,  
cables, connectors, relays, switches, and transmitters and much of the instru­mentation and logic systems in nuclear plants. Specific qualification require­ments for some of these component classes were developed in successor  
standards to IEE Std 323. They include Std 334 for motors { 1971, revised  
1974), Std 381 for electronic circuit modules (1977), Std 382 for electric valve  
operators ( 1972), and Std 383 for electric cables, field splices, and connections  
(1974). Seismic qualification of safety-related electrical equipment is treated  
in Std 344 (1971, revised 1.975, discussed in Section4.5).  
These standards raised the severity and scope of electrh::al equipment  
qualification requirements. The 1971 edition of Std 334 applied only to safety­related motors inside containment, but the 1974 edition extends to critical  
motors outside containment, such as pumps for the ECCS and the residual heat  
removal system. The test cycle in the 1974 edition was also expanded to  
require that motors aged to the end of their expected life be able to function  
after exposure to severe accident conditions.  
Similarly, Std 383 specifies elaborate testing and documentation require­ments for electrical connections and splices made at the plant site. For all  
electrical conductors, the installer must record material type, size, and coat­ing; insulation thickness, material, and application method; types of shielding  
and covering; and, for instrumentation cables, their capacitance, attenuation,  
and impedance.  
Probably the greatest change in equipment qualification has come from  
the addition of an aging step to qualification programs in the 1974 revision to  
IEEE std 323. The physical and chemical properties of materials in electrical  
equipment can deteriorate with time, because of both normal aging and the  
effect of continuous or occasional thermal cycling, humidity, radiation, etc.  
Accordingly, equipment is now put in a simulated advanced-life state in  
evaluating its functionability under postulated environmental conditions.  
Unfortunately, the fundamental processes that produce aging degra­dation (e.g., embrittlement) are only poorly understood, and the possible  
synergistic influences of multiple environments (temperature, humidity,  
radiation, and vibration) have not been fully explored. Accordingly, the  
artificial pre-aging techniques in use, largely thermal stress, are conceded to be  
of questionable validity for many safety-related materials22 and are the subject  
of an extensive NRC research program. Consideration of aging in equipment  
qualification is nevertheless requiring more complex testing procedures (see  
box for a complete list of the elements) and is beginning to lead to costly  
upgradings for some electrical equipment.  
Qualification tests and material improvements are the responsibility of  
Chapter4 81 I. Aging  
Elements Of Current Equipment  
Qualification Programs  
A. Environmental  
• Thermal  
• Nuclear Radiation  
• Humidity and Chemical (moisture, oxygen, ozone)  
• Pressurization Cycles*  
• Seismic**  
B. Operational  
• Start/Stop Cycles  
• Total Operating Time  
• Process Conditions Associated with Normal  
Operation (including testing)***  
• Normal Maintenance  
II. Design Basis Events (DBE)  
A. Seismic  
B. Loss-of-Coolant Accident or Pipe Break  
Outside Containment  
• Nuclear Radiation  
• Steam  
• Deluge Spray ( demineralizer water or chemical  
solution)  
• Flooding  
C. Process Conditions Associated with DBE  
• Equipment located within primary containment is subjected to external pressuri­zation during periodic leak rate tests.  
** Some number (typically 5) of "Operating Basis Earthquakes" (see Section  
4.4) during the installed life of the equipment must be assumed.  
••• Includes vibration due to fluid flow and/or equipment operation.  
the equipment manufacturers, and cost increases are passed on to the licensee.  
Few cost estimates are available, but the increases appear significant. The  
Washington Public Power Supply System estimates that it has spent $6/kW  
(apparently in mixed current dollars) for testing and documentation alone for  
82 Chapter4 an estimated 4,000 pieces of safety-related equipment at each of its five  
reactors under construction. 23 Moreover, failures of "qualified" electrical  
connectors at nuclear plants and NRC's discovery of widespread deficiencies  
in manufacturers' qualification programs are likely to provoke substantial,  
costly improvements in the future (see Section 5. 1).  
Section 4.4: Protection Against Internally-Induced  
Accidents  
This section discusses changes in design and equipment to prevent  
damage to safety-related equipment in the event of failure of other equipment.  
The major failures of concern are the release of objects at high speeds from  
rapidly rotating machinery (referred to as "missiles"); pipe ruptures causing  
pipes to move ("whip") violently, release fluids under pressure, or cause  
flooding; and the release of heavy loads from overhead cranes onto critical  
equipment.  
Consideration of these accidents - referred to here as internally-in­duced accidents. since they are induced when equipment failure in one system  
adversely affects separate systems- increased significantly during the 1970s.  
Neither missiles, pipe rupture, nor crane failure figured greatly in AEC review  
until the early 1970s. By the late 1970s each had become the focus of sig­nificant NRC requirements affecting equipment quality (as discussed in the  
two preceding sections), location, separation, and redundancy. Moreover, a  
major increase in engineering effort was required to sift the large numbers of  
potential initiating failures for those that could lead to serious accidents.  
Protection Against Missiles: Nuclear plants contain many parts of  
sufficient mass rotating fast enough to cause significant damage if they should  
suddenly break free and penetrate their housing (if there is one). A prime  
example is the flywheels attached to reactor coolant pump motors. They  
consist of several large, joined discs which store large amounts of rotational  
energy to drive the pumps for brief periods if the motors lose power. This  
energy could cause considerable damage if the flywheel should break loose or  
split apart. The "initiating event" that could produce excessive stress is  
overspeeding ("windmilling") of pumps due to pressure loss during a loss-of­coolant accident (LOCA).  
AEC Regulatory Guide (RG) 1.14, issued in 1971, upgraded the design  
margins, equipment qualification, and inspectability of reactor coolant pump  
motor flywheels (see box for description of regulatory guides and other NRC  
requirements). The guide mandated that flywheel discs be produced only in  
extremely high-quality fabrication processes (vacuum-melting and degassing  
or electroslag remelting), with careful checking of the material's fracture  
toughness and tensile strength, and strict control of welding. The flywheel  
Chapter4 83 Nuclear Regulatory Commission Regulations,  
Guides And Standards  
NRC standards are published in Regulations, in Regulatory  
Guides, and in the Standard Review Plan.  
Regulations. requirements that licensees must meet, are pub­lished in different parts of Title 10, Chapter I of the Code of  
Federal Regulations (10 CFR). Part 50, Licensing of Production  
and Utilization Facilities, includes as its Appendix A a set of  
General Design Criteria establishing, in general terms, the neces­sary design, fabrication, construction, testing, and performance  
requirements for equipment and systems important to safety.  
Among other relevant parts of 10 CFR are Part 20, Standards for  
Protection Against Radiation, and Part 100, Reactor Site Criteria.  
Regulatory Guides describe methods acceptable to NRC staff  
for implementing specific parts of NRC regulations. They also  
delineate techniques used by staff to evaluate specific problems or  
postulated accidents. As described in Chapter 3, most regulatory  
guides serve as de facto regulations since it is usually less costly for  
licensees to conform with them than to seek approval for alterna­tive approaches.  
Regulatory guides are issued in ten different "divisions,"  
covering research reactors, materials transportation, fuel cycle  
facilities, etc. The division of concern here is Division I, power  
reactor guides. All guides and industry consensus standards dis­cussed in Sections 4.3 through 4. 10 are listed at the end of this  
chapter.  
The Standard Review Plan is a compilation of internal NRC  
review procedures used in licensing reactors. There is much over­lap between the Standard Review Plan and regulatory guides. Both  
describe acceptable design and construction approaches and both  
frequently notify applicants of information needed for the staff's  
licensing reviews.  
NRC regulations, regulatory guides, and provisions of the  
Standard Review Plan are generally referred to interchangeably  
here as "standards" or "requirements," reflecting their actual, if  
not legal, status in the regulatory process.  
must be designed to fracture at not less than its possible overspeed during -a  
LOCA and at not less than twice its normal operating speed. All high-stress  
areas of the flywheel and its attachment to the motor must be capable of  
84 Chapter4 inspection without removing the flywheel from its shaft. These requirements  
added significantly to the cost of reactor coolant pump motors.  
The steel discs that hold the blades of nuclear steam turbines are also a  
potential source of damaging missiles due to their high rotational speed ( 1800  
rpm) and large mass. Turbines are equipped with protective devices to prevent  
overspeeding, but failure of these devices could cause discs to rupture, in  
which case fragments weighing as much as several tons might leave the  
rotating shaft at high speeds. The fragments could be contained by the heavy  
steel turbine casing, but they might also break through, as has happened in  
several fossil plants and one foreign reactor. 24 The fragment might retain  
sufficient kinetic energy to penetrate the turbine building and enter the con­tainment building, where it could strike critical equipment such as reactor  
coolant piping, steam generators, or the control rod drive housing above the  
reactor vessel (in PWRs).  
NRC's approach to low-trajectory turbine missiles (the most likely  
missiles of concern), set forth in RG I. I 15, involves turbine orientation and  
protective barriers. The simplest defense is to orient the turbine axis so that  
turbine missiles cannot strike the containment building. This may require  
separate service cranes for each turbine in a multi-unit plant or other minor  
adjustments, but the costs are smalL For plants already underconstruciton with  
a "high-risk" turbine orientation, however, RG 1.115 required considerable  
analysis. In some cases, moreover, concrete or steel shielding was installed  
around potentially vulnerable, critical· plant systems including the reactor  
coolant system, emergency and residual cooling systems, the control room,  
and the gaseous radwaste system.  
Other potential missiles among nuclear plant components are the subject  
of ANSI draft Std Nl77 which has been incorporated, with little alteration,  
into NRC's Standard Review Plan. The standard requires consideration of a  
tremendous number of potential missile accidents. They include overpressure  
or material fatigue causing devices such as valve stems and bonnets, instru­ment gauges, and other fragments of pressure-retaining equipment to separate  
and be propelled by pressurized fluid; seizure or overspeed of pumps, fans, or  
turbines causing propulsion of blades, bolts, or flywheels; and "indirect"  
sources of missiles such as chemical explosions, pipe ruptures, and short­circuits in transformers or switchgear causing electrical components to melt  
and be ejected through electromagnetic repulsion.  
Designers must also identify possible critical targets: fluid systems such  
as the reactor coolant system and emergency and long-term cooling systems;  
structures such as steam generators and their supports, housing or enclosures  
for safety equipment, and the containment steel lining; electrical and control  
equipment and their housing, such as conduits and cable trays; and motors and  
auxiliary equipment which drive fans, pumps, and valves. This analysis must  
consider the relative locations of missile sources and targets, the possible  
energy and angle of ejection, and the likely strike angle and orientation of the  
Chapter4 85 missile upon impact.  
Not all conceivable accidents require prevention, but protection against  
missiles has led to considerable equipment changes. Fabrication, equipment  
qualification, and inspection have been upgraded for much rotating machin­ery. Barriers and housings have been strengthened, especially for conduits and  
cable trays, which afford less protection than piping walls. Substantial en­gineering effort has also been involved.  
Protection Against Pipe Failure: Nuclear plant piping systems contain  
considerable volumes of water and steam maintained under very high pres­sures. The thrust of high-pressure fluid from a complete pipe rupture could  
cause the pipe to whip about with great force. Water or steam released in even a  
partial rupture may strike equipment with high, destructive pressure ("jet  
impingement") or at least flood or saturate the vicinity. AEC General Design  
Criterion No. 4 required protection for safety-related equipment from such  
phenomena, but design requirements to do so were not spelled out until the  
1970s.  
RG 1.46 issued in 1973, stipulates possible pipe break locations to be  
analyzed to determine protective measures against pipe whip within the reactor  
containment. The locations include all terminal ends of piping runs - struc­tures such as piping anchors or components such as vessel or equipment  
nozzles which constrain piping movement or expansion - and intermediate  
piping locations of potential high stress and fatigue, such as pipe fittings (e.g.,  
elbows and tees), valves, flanges, and welded attachments. Conservative  
stress intensity and usage factors must be employed to calculate stress loca­tions, taking account of possible degradation or errors in design, fabrication,  
installation, and operation. Two or more intermediate locations must be  
analyzed for each piping run.  
RG 1.46 addresses only ''high-energy'' piping (above 200°F or 275 psig  
pressure) in excess of stipulated widths (at least one inch for circumferential  
pipe breaks, four inches forlongitudinal breaks) within containment. Never­theless, it covers much reactor piping, and later plants contain pipe restraints at  
most of the examined locations. These are usually concrete or steel encase­ments that physically separate piping from other components, designed to high  
seismic standards to ensure that they remain intact during earthquakes. Costs  
for the restraints and the engineering analysis have been substantial.  
Jet impingement and related steam and flooding effects from pipe rupture  
are addressed in ANSI draft Std Nl76 which has been incorporated into the  
Standard Review Plan. It requires designers to postulate complete pipe rup­tures, partial breaks, and through-wall cracks that could generate fluid jets at  
the same locations examined for pipe whipping. This analysis is more compli­cated than that for pipe whipping, since jet impingement forces, flooding,  
saturation with steam, and potential pressurization of nearby compartments  
must be considered.  
86 Chapter4 Although the ANSI standard and the Standard Review Plan recommend  
rather than require protective measures, plant designers have built in consider­able structures to protect safety-related equipment and maintain access to areas  
required to cope with pipe ruptures. These include deflectors to absorb and  
shield fluid jets, further enclosure and separation of piping from safety-related  
structures and equipment, and provision of redundant safety-related equip­ment where separation is impracticaL In addition, much safety-related equip­ment has been designed to withstand the high pressure, humidity, and tempera­tures that could result from fluid jets, as discussed in Section 4.3  
Overhead Cranes: Nuclear plants contain large overhead cranes for  
moving and storing fuel assemblies, spent fuel casks, and the reactor vessel  
head and upper internals. PWRs require two cranes, one inside the contain­ment building over the reactor vessel, the other in the spent fuel storage area  
outside containment. Most BWRs require only one since the spent fuel pool is  
inside the reactor building, but two cranes will be needed for the new Mark III  
design, which has an external spent fuel pooL  
Most items handled by the cranes are deemed "critical loads" because  
dropping them could lead to release of radioactivity. For example, the impact  
of a large load on the spent fuel pool could damage cooling and make-up  
systems, leading to loss of coolant and heat-up of the spent fuel with subse­quent fuel damage and radiation release. The NRC has allowed licensees to  
meet some safety requirements for critical loads by strengthening vulnerable  
structures, for example, by adding protective barriers to the spent fuel pool  
cover. At most recent plants, however, crane handling systems have also been  
upgraded to reduce the chances of dropping critical loads.  
NRC crane reliability requirements are set forth in a 1979 report by the  
Commission's Office of Standards Development, which superseded a 1976  
regulatory guide. 25 The report requires upgrading design and fabrication  
requirements for crane hoisting and braking systems so that a single failure will  
not cause critical loads to be dropped. These requirements affect all the  
structural, mechanical, and electrical systems that enable cranes to lift and  
move loads, including the overhead bridge and trolley, the braking and control  
systems, and the hoisting system.  
The report's major advance is its application of the single-failure cri­terione to crane systems. The single load block is replaced by a double block  
system which also requires an equalizer beam to distribute the loads equally.  
The cable hoisting system must have two holding brakes in addition to the  
power control braking system, and these must be stronger than previously. A  
dual braking system is required to guarantee control over bridge and trolley  
traveL Moreover, the hoisting and trolley systems must be capable of manual  
operation in the event that control failure immobilizes the crane while it is  
e. See p. 156 for a description of the single failure criterion.  
Chapter4 87 holding a critical load. Similarly, the motor controls must be able to accommo­date excessive electric current and overspeed or overload conditions.  
The NRC report also upgrades crane design margins and material speci­fications. Since the crane might be operating during an earthquake, the bridge  
must be strong enough to remain intact and the trolley must be designed to stay  
in its runway and hold its loads despite seismic stress. Critical bridge and  
trolley weld joints must be examined prior to installation, materials for critical  
structural members must be tested extensively prior to fabrication, and the  
crane manufacturer must conduct a fatigue analysis for critical load-bearing  
structures and components. The report also mandates 15% greater design  
margins for component parts subject to wear and exposure. Thicker and  
stronger cables are also required, which in tum necessitates strengthening  
other components to handle the higher loads.  
These requirements began to be employed in NRC licensing review in  
1975, and they subsequently expanded to the level described above. The  
associated costs are only partially reflected in the later plants in the nuclear data  
sample and will be more fully experienced by plants still under construction.  
Section 4.5: Protection Against Earthquakes And Other  
Natural Phenomena  
AEC and NRC regulations have required that nuclear plants be designed  
to withstand earthquakes and other natural phenomena without suffering dam­age that could lead to accidents and without losing safety systems needed to  
prevent accidents. 26 Interpretation of this requirement became more stringent  
beginning in the mid- 1960s and continuing during the 1970s, leading to  
substantial plant design and equipment changes and concomitant increased  
engineering efforts that contributed significantly to increases in nuclear plant  
capital costs.  
The AEC first encountered seismic issues in reviewing proposed reactors  
at Bodega Bay in 1962 and at Malibu in 1964, both on the California coast. The  
Commission's modest seismic requirements were criticized in expert testi­mony sponsored by intervenors, including the Sierra Club (Bodega Bay) and  
local residents and property owners led by comedian Bob Hope (Malibu).  
Their testimony established that both sites were potentially subject to greater  
ground acceleration than AEC staff had initially specified, and that the novel  
Bodega Bay design could not be guaranteed to attenuate ground movement  
sufficiently to prevent damage from earthquakes.  
Both reviews were prolonged and marked by clashes of opinion between  
the Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards and more conservative fac­tions among regulatory staff. The AEC ultimately rejected both applications,  
Bodega Bay in late 1964 and Malibu in early 1967. The public uproar and new  
information (and uncertainties) generated in both battles led the AEC to begin  
88 Chapter4 setting detailed seismic protection criteria.  
AEC/NRC seismic protection methodology entails a chain of predic­tions, including:  
• the magnitude of possible earthquakes;  
• the transmission of earthquake forces through the ground;  
• the response of structures to these forces; and  
• the behavior of equipment within the structures. 27  
Considerable uncertainties are involved at each level of prediction. Increased  
information and an expanding reactor population have led AEC/NRC to re­solve the uncertainties in the direction of greater conservatism.  
Earthquake Magnitude: Following its reviews of Bodega Bay and  
Mailbu, AEC staff developed the concept of the Operating Basis Earthquake  
(OBE) and the Safe Shutdown Earthquake (SSE). The OBE is the maximum  
earthquake "reasonably" expected during plant lifetime, based on past earth­quakes at the site or in areas with similar geologic characteristics. The SSE is  
the maximum possible earthquake potential for the site. Reactors must be able  
to remain operable during an OBE and to shut down without losing any safety  
systems during an SSE. Both are specified by the applicant, subject to AEC/  
NRC review. The OBE is generally at least half the SSE. The SSE varies  
considerably among reactor sites, ranging from O.lOg- equivalent to one­tenth the acceleration of gravity- in the least seismically active regions, to  
0. 75g for several West Coast reactors. The 0. lOg floor was established inform­ally by AEC staff during 1965-67 and codified as a regulation in 1973. 28  
The magnitudes of reactor SSEs have increased only slightly over time,  
with several notable exceptions. When an assertedly minor fault 3'h miles  
form the Diablo Canyon site in California was later identified as an extension  
of the more potent Hosgri fault, the NRC required the utility to raise the SSE  
from 0.40g to 0.75g. This led to extensive re-analysis and design modifica­tions which have prevented start-up since 1977. Similarly, the 0.67g SSE for  
San Onofre 2 and 3 in California is higher than the 0.50g value for Unit 1.  
Architect-engineers have conservatively specified the highest SSE  
values outside the West Coast, 0.25g to 0.30g, for the several standardized  
plants under construction in an effort to avert the possible later need for  
recalculations and the resulting expensive re-design during construction.  
Nevertheless, there has been little general move toward increases in earth­quake design bases since the early commercial-size reactors. Seismic criteria  
have changed primarily in projecting the effects of earthquakes of given  
magnitudes and in specifying necessary protective standards and systems.  
Earthquake Forces and Structural Response: Four regulatory guides  
issued between 1973 and 1976 (but reflected in earlier regulatory review) have  
altered the methods used by nuclear designers to translate the intensities of  
Chapter4 89 postulated earthquakes into potential effects on plant structures. RG 1.60 and  
1.61 defined calculational procedures for estimating the maximum responses  
of hypothetical structures to a given earthquake's motion. The guides specified  
the degrees of horizontal and vertical acceleration (response spectra) to be  
assumed for different earthquakes, as well as the "damping" capabilities of  
various plant structures - their ability to dissipate vibrational energy rather  
than transmitting it to connected structures. Most specifications in the guides  
were more conservative than past practice.  
RG I. 92, issued in !974, presented a new method for combining loads to  
estimate the total response of a structure to the components of earthquake­induced forces, e.g:, east-west vibratory motion concurrent with north-south  
motion. The guide essentially replaced "static" models, which assumed that  
forces would act on the center of gravity of structures, with "dynamic  
models" which effectively divide structures into sections connected by  
springs representing stiffness. Greater deformation of structures is predicted  
by the dynamic models.  
Finally, RG 1.122, issued in 1976, provided a means of estimating the  
responses of equipment or structures supported at various levels above the  
main foundations of the plant buildings. The previous method had neglected  
most of the amplification of vibratory forces from the flexibility of supporting  
structures.  
An earlier regulatory guide, RG 1.12, required that reactors include an  
instrumentation system to measure the input vibratory ground motion from  
actual earthquakes and the resultant vibratory response of critical plant struc­tures. Its purpose is to provide immediate indication of the plant's response to  
earthquakes and also to compare the actual vibratory response to that predicted  
in developing the plant design. The system includes triaxial peak accelero­graphs and triaxial response-spectrum recorders installed on reactor equip­ment, reactor piping, the containment foundation, and safety-related auxiliary  
structures outside containment.  
Seismic Protection and Equipment Standards: The most significant  
cost impacts from seismic protection have been felt directly in equipment  
requirements and quality standards. Since the early 1970s, AEC/NRC has  
maintained a roster of plant equipment which must be designed, manufactured,  
and installed to exacting requirements to ensure that it can remain functional  
despite the effects of the SSE. The "Seismic Category I" list has been  
expanded through four editions of RG 1.29. Originally it comprised only the  
reactor coolant pressure boundary (essentially the reactor vessel, primary  
cooling loops, and primary reactor piping). It now also includes the ECCS,  
systems to remove heat and radionuclides from containment, normal and  
auxiliary electric power systems and circuitry, and the control room, among  
other equipment. The quality assurance requirements for these systems have  
led to more exacting, hence costly, manufacturing standards and verification  
90 Chapter4 procedures, as discussed in Section 4.2.  
Procedures to qualify (i.e., demonstrate the adequacy throughout service  
life) electrical equipment needed to ensure safe shutdown during an earthquake  
were especially upgraded during· the 1970s. They are delineated in IEEE  
Standards 323 and 344, first published in 1971 and revised in 1974 and 1975.  
These standards were applied voluntarily in nuclear construction until they  
were endorsed by NRC Regulatory Guides 1.89 and 1.100 in 1974 and 1976,  
respectively.  
The IEEE standards require that electrical equipment (including batter­ies, switchgear, cables, relays, motors, and electronic sensors and indicators  
of pressure, temperature, and flow) used in safety-related systems have dem­onstrated capability to withstand the vibratory effects of earthquakes through­out their installed life in the plant. Although proof of seismic qualification may  
be provided by analysis, in which seismic effects are calculated using elaborate  
computer models, this approach is generally applied only to large pieces of  
equipment that are difficult to test due to limitations in the loading capability of  
vibration equipment. The preferred method is direct testing of the equipment  
by subjecting it to a simulated earthquake while measurements are made of its  
mechanical strength, alignment, electrical performance, and non-interruption  
offunction.  
Elaborate tests are required to ensure accurate mounting, monitoring,  
assessment, and documentation. They must be geared to the "response  
spectrum'' that the SSE would generate in the equipment, as predicted by the  
structural response analysis discussed earlier. A minimum of five OBEs and  
one SSE are simulated. Current tests are more complex than earlier ones,  
applying simultaneous excitation along two axes of the specimen (versus one  
previously) and employing random. frequencies and amplitudes - much like  
the time history of an actual earthquake (versus only one frequency component  
previously). In addition, the number of components required to be tested has  
grown with the expanding designation of Seismic Category I equipment.  
Another series of regulatory guides significantly upgraded requirements  
for fluid systems, containment components, and component supports. Fluid  
systems are vessels, pipes, pumps, and valves containing or controlling water  
or steam. Prior to 1973, licensees designed the fluid system components of  
their plants by consulting the Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code of the American  
Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), a professional society that sets  
standards for industrial fluid-bearing materials and equipment. The code  
specifies the design requirements (i.e., the anticipated mechanical, pressure,  
and thermal loads) for various nuclear plant components. But because different  
licensees faced with identical seismic and other service conditions frequently  
assumed different loading combinations and associated design limits, the AEC  
issued RG 1.48 in May 1973.  
This guide chose the particular ASME code requirements for each equip­ment category. Its requirements were generally more conservative than pre­Chapter4 9! vious practice, with the result that valves, pipes, etc. were designed to accom­modate higher pressures and temperatures and greater combinations of me­chanical loads (e.g., pipe reactions or pressure loads generated by accidents).  
Another aspect of these changes was a substantial increase in the numbers of  
supports and restraints provided for nuclear piping, both inside and outside  
containment, with a concomitant significant increase in costs.  
RG 1.48 also specified more rigorous design limits and performance  
specifications (e.g., response times) for active pumps and valves - those  
which must perform mechanical motion to accomplish their safety function. It  
superseded the ASME code requirement that pumps and valves merely main·  
tain their presssure-retaining integrity without assurance of operability.  
RG 1. 57 defined analogous requirements for components of the metal  
primary reactor containment. These include the steel containment lining,  
containment penetration assembliel and access openings, and piping systems  
attached to containment vessel nozzles or penetration assemblies. As with  
fluid systems, reactor designers had not been applying the ASME Code  
uniformly in specifying the capabilities required for these components.  
The guide primarily lists the applicable ASME Code sections for con­tainment components, with certain key modifications. Vibratory motion from  
earthquakes must be included in calculating material strengths required to  
withstand the long-term strain induced by varying plant power levels. Simi­larly, seismic stress must be considered in tandem with the effects of water jets  
from possible pipe ruptures in specifying the design requirements of metal  
components of the containment structure.  
Finally, two later regulatory guides, RG I. 124 and RG I. 130, set similar  
requirements for critical component supports. These are structural elements  
such as beams, columns, trusses, and vessel skirts which carry the weight of  
components or give them structural stability. The guides mandate considerable  
increases in the physical attributes, quality assurance steps, and engineering  
analysis for much of the support structure of nuclear plants.  
Both guides direct that the same QA requirements and design limits be  
applied to component supports for safety-related equipment as to the com­ponents themselves. They also require that seismic loads be included in the  
loading calculations used to determine the design strengths of component  
supports. They surpass the ASME Code in some respects, requiring, for  
example, that structures have adequate tensile strength over the possible range  
of accident temperatures rather than merely at room temperature as some  
sections of the Code require.  
f. RG 1.57 defines penetration assemblies as parts or appurtenances required to permit  
piping. mechanical devices. and electrical equipment to pass through the containment vessel  
shell or head and maintain leaktight integrity while compensating for such phenomena as  
temperature and pressure fluctuations and earthquake movement.  
92 Chapter4 Protection Against Floods and Tornadoes: Nuclear plant protection  
from non-seismic natural phenomena also increased during the 1970s. New  
geographical data have led to higher-strength "design basis" floods and  
tornadoes at some sites, and equipment design margins have been increased.  
Nuclear plant structures are potentially vulnerable to tornado-generated  
pressure and to tornado-induced missiles such as telephone poles. Protective  
measures were first seriously considered in licensing reviews in the late 1960s  
and were applied in the early 1970s by new requirements subsequently issued  
as regulatory guides.  
RG I. 76 requires plants east of the Rockies to be able to withstand 360  
mile-per-hour tornado wind speeds. Western plants are designed to 240-300  
mph speeds and to commensurately lower pressure drops. RG l. 1 J7 names  
plant structures and systems requiring special protection. It has led to increases  
in wall thicknesses, typically from 18 inches to 24-28 inches, in auxiliary  
buildings, housings for diesel generators and their fuel supply, and condensate  
storage tank structures. (containment buildings were generally already de­signed to tornado strength for reactor accident considerations.) Doors, win­dows, and safety-related cable and pipe penetrations have also been strength­ened against tornado-generated missiles.  
A recent revision of RG I. 1 I 7 requires tornado protection for systems  
that provide long-term post-accident cooling and limit radiation releases.  
These include the residual heat removal system, the gaseous radwaste treat­ment system, the control room, and supporting instrumentation and controls.  
Although this requirement applies only to recent construction starts, it may  
also lead to increased shielding and wall strengthening at plants in advanced  
stages of construction.  
Flooding is also of concern for nuclear plants, since most are located near  
water sources which have potential for flooding. As with tornadoes, require­ments for protection against floods grew in the late 1960s and early 1970s and  
were then codified in two regulatory guides.  
RG 1.59 spelled out methods for determining flood conditions which a  
plant must be designed to withstand without losing safety system functioning.  
These conditions could result from the ''probable maximum flood'' for the site  
(as estimated by the Army Corps of Engineers), from seismically-induced  
floods or dam failures, from other dam failures, or from hurricanes, tides,  
snowmelt, wind-generated wave activity, or severe local precipitation.  
RG I. 102 specifies flood protection design alternatives. A plant may be  
constructed at a dry site with the natural terrain or engineered fill raising it  
above the design flood level. It may be protected by exterior barriers -levees  
to prevent inundation, seawalls or bulkheads to defend against wave erosion,  
breakwaters to deter wave attack. Or important equipment may be shielded by  
incorporated barriers, essentially heavy wall reinforcing and water-tight seal­ing of chambers, piping penetrations, and equipment hatches. Although de­sign approaches and equipment for flood protection are site-specific, most later  
Chapter4 93 plants have incorporated greater protective measures. The increased engineer­ing and site analysis have also added to costs.  
Section 4.6: Fire Protection  
Fire protection requirements for nuclear plants have become more strin­gent in recent years, largely because of the very serious fire at the Browns Ferry  
plant in March 1975. Plants starting construction after 1976 have had to  
incorporate extensive design features intended to prevent, contain, and miti­gate fires that might disable safety-related equipment. Plants already operating  
or in construction have been exempted from many of the requirements but have  
been required to take substantial alternative protective measures. All genera­tions of plants have incurred significant costs, and further requirements lie  
ahead.  
Federal fire protection regulations were limited before Browns Ferry,  
despite the occurrence of several dozen fires at operating reactors. 29 AEC  
General Design Criterion No. 3 directed only that noncombustible and heat­resistant construction materials be used "wherever practical," and that fire  
detection and control systems be provided to prevent fires from affecting  
safety-related equipment. Regulatory Guide I. 75, published in early 1974,  
specified that electric power supplies and cables important to safety be physi­cally separated to prevent fires from disabling redundant safety systems. The  
guide applied only to new construction starts, however, and did not address  
operating plants or those in construction.  
The Browns Ferry Fire: The fire on March 22, 1975 at the Tennessee  
Valley Authority's Browns Ferry nuclear plant in Alabama provided a power­ful impetus for change. The fire was initiated by an electrician's use of a candle  
to check for air leaks in a cable-spreading area beneath the control room. It  
spread rapidly and lasted for six hours, consuming 1600 cables, including 618  
related to safety systems, and disabling much of the instrumentation and  
control systems for the plant's two operating units. For several hours, one unit  
was without its nonnal feedwater system, all three emergency core cooling  
mechanisms, and most of its reactor monitors. The reactor cooling water level  
fell dangerously clos.e to the top of the fuel and was maintained only by a  
condensate booster pump that was barely able to deliver the minimum water  
required. Much ventilating and firefighting equipment either malfunctioned or  
was inaccessible. Thick smoke and fumes filled the control room during much  
of the accident, adding to the problems created by equipment and instrument  
failures. 30  
The fire was publicized around the world and was considered the most  
perilous accident at a commercial nuclear plant until Three Mile Island. The  
NRC's regulatory response is stated primarily in a section of the Standard  
94 Chapter4 Review Plan issued in late 1976.  
Fire Protection For New Plants: The Standard Review Plan requires  
that new plants- those whose construction permit applications were docketed  
after June 1976- contain a comprehensive design for fire protection. Redun­dant divisions ("trains") of safety-related systems must be separated so that  
both are not subject to damage from a single fire hazard. Similarly, fire barriers  
(fire-resistant walls, doors, floors, etc.) must be provided that can isolate  
safety-related systems from fires in non-safety-related areas for three hours.  
Cable-spreading rooms may not contain both redundant safety divisions, and  
adjoining reactors may not share the same cable-spreading room. To prevent  
fires from propagating in electrical cables, cable trays must be made of metal  
and equipped with continuous heat detectors, cable tray penetrations through  
fire barriers must be sealed and fireproofed, and fire stops must be installed  
along cable routings at frequent intervals.  
The plan also stipulates noncombustible material requirements for much  
of the plant, including interior walls, structures, and finishes, and radiation  
shielding. In addition, ventilation systems must be capable of removing heat  
and smoke from a fire vicinity without conveying combustion products to  
critical areas such as the control room. Fire-fighting systems must include  
automatic systems in inaccessible spaces such as primary containment or in  
areas where safety considerations preclude fire barriers.  
Drains must be provided to remove firefighting waterflow from the  
vicinity of safety-related equipment, but they must not provide fires with a path  
to spread. The capability to collect, sample, and analyze drainage from poten­tially radioactive areas is also required. Guaranteeing a water supply for  
firefighting requires a system of pumps, valves, pipes, storage tanks, and  
hoses.  
New plants must also have fire detectors in all areas in which safety­related equipment might be exposed to fire. Fixed and portable emergency  
lighting and communication systems must be provided. Finally, since earth­quakes can induce electrical fires, NRC Staff now considers the need to qualify  
new plants' fire detection and fighting equipment to be functional following the  
designated Safe Shutdown Earthquake (see definition in preceding section).  
These are merely the highlights of the extensive, detailed fire protection  
rules in the Standard Review Plan. They affect a large portion of plant design,  
not only by calling for additional equipment but also by requiring redundant  
safety systems to be separated by distance and/or physical barriers. Separation  
is costly because the increased space necessitates larger structures to house  
cables and other equipment as well as more cable and piping to span the longer  
distances. Considerable engineering, moreover, is involved in both the fire  
hazards analysis and the actual design effort- in planning cable routing, for  
example.  
Chapter4 95 Fire Protection for Plants in Progress: Many of the 1976 fire protec­tion provisions of the Standard Review Plan could be difficult and expensive to  
implement in plants already built. Accordingly, the plan permits deviations for  
plants in operation or still in construction where strict adherence would be  
impracticable. Plants in progress are not required to meet all physical separa­tion requirements for redundant safety-related systems. Instead they may rely  
on fire-retardant coatings and fire detection and fighting systems to prevent or  
extinguish fires that might otherwise propagate from control cables of one  
safety system to those of its back-up.  
Similarly, cable-spreading rooms may be shared between reactors  
operating or under construction and need not be separated from other plant  
areas by three-hour fire barriers, provided that fire-retardant materials are used  
and fire detection equipment and automatic suppression systems are installed  
near. electrical cables. There are similar exemptions for separation criteria for  
pumps and other safety-related equipment. Fire-retardant coatings are permit­ted as an alternative to requiring safety-related cables to be enclosed in covered  
conduits or trays and requiring highly fire-resistant seals for cable penetrations  
through walls and structures. Cables that fail standard fire-propagation tests  
need not be replaced if they are retardant-coated and derated (the thermally­insulating coatiflg could build up excessive heat at high amperages).  
Plants in progress also need not be able to ventilate smoke and corrosive  
gases to safe locations or monitor the content and pathways of radioactive  
combustion products. Similarly, fioor drains are not required near fire-fighting  
fixtures or near sensitive equipment unless water accumulating from their  
operation could create "unacceptable consequences." Some deviations from  
fire detection guidelines are permitted, and most fire-fighting equipment need  
not be operable following a severe earthquake.  
Notwithstanding these liberal allowances, considerable expenditures  
were required for most recently completed plants to comply with the plan.  
They have installed fire barriers and suppression systems; applied retardant  
coatings to cables and cable penetrations and added compensating cable capa­city; and performed fire hazards analyses to satisfy NRC review. Some plants  
under construction that could not meet the physical separation criteria of RG  
1. 75 have had to add auxiliary reactor shutdown systems whose cabling is  
routed outside the cable-spreading room. The logistical problems in treating  
cables already installed and erecting walls in previously constructed areas have  
added further to costs.  
Existing plants will be affected further by a new fire protection regulation  
adopted by the NRC in October 1980. 31 Most plants must install auxiliary  
shutdown systems as described above; bolster automatic fire-fighting capa­bility with manual capability throughout the plant; install sectional control  
valves on fire mains to allow local fire-fighting system maintenance; provide a  
dedicated fire-fighting water distribution system with two separate trains;  
install emergency lighting near reactor shutdown equipment; and upgrade  
96 Chapter4 automatic fire detection systems. Licensees have until early 1983 to make most  
improvements.  
Fire protection costs would probably be still higher for any plants making  
construction permit applications after July 1976, for which the foregoing  
deviations would not be permitted. The re-design and re-construction pro­blems avoided in those cases would probably be outweighed by the extensive  
requirements for physical separation, ventilation, and electric cable verifica­tion, as discussed in Section 5. I.  
Section 4. 7: The Reactor Core And Cooling Systems  
The heart of a nuclear power plant is the reactor pressure vessel, its fuel  
and control rod assemblies, and the pipes, pumps, valves, and tanks that  
circulate water through the reactor "core" under both operating and accident  
conditions. Core designs and standards have not changed greatly since the first  
commercial plants. Cooling water circulating equipment has evolved some­what, however, with a noticeable effect on costs.  
Emergency Core Cooling System: The Emergency Core Cooling Sys­tem (ECCS) comprises equipment intended to replenish reactor cooling water  
to prevent fuel overheating and melting following a loss-of-coolant accident  
(LOCA). It encompasses several equipment "trains" designed to deliver  
water to the core under a wide range of pressures corresponding to different  
types of LOCAs (e.g., breaks in coolant pipes of varying sizes and at varying  
locations). PWRs have pump-actuated high- and low-pressure coolant injec­tion systems and "accumulators" containing water and nitrogen under pres­sure which automatically release water if core pressure falls below a set level.  
BWRs have low- and high-pressure core spray systems, a low-pressure core  
flooding system, and a system to automatically depressurize the reactor cool­ant to enable the low-pressure systems to be effective.  
ECCS changes have been primarily incremental, directed at improving  
early designs rather than developing radically new configurations. Changes  
have come in response to pressure from the Advisory Committee on Reactor  
Safeguards (see preceding chapter) and as a result of the AEC's ECCS rule­making hearings from mid-1971 to early 1973. The hearings led to new ECCS  
performance criteria including closer limits on fuel temperatures and rates of  
cladding oxidation during accidents to improve control ofLOCAs. 32 Although  
the new criteria did not directly require significant equipment changes, they  
made clear the AEC's intent to upgrade ECCS capacity and reliability. They  
also required the reactor vendors to improve their analytical models to demon­strate that the ECCS could meet the new criteria- a major effect that has been  
reflected in nuclear steam supply system costs.  
The capacities of ECCS injection and flooding systems have increased  
Chapter4 97 over time, requiring expansion of circulating pumps and pipes, holding tanks,  
and vessel inlets that deliver water to the core. The delivery conduit for BWR  
high-pressure coolant systems has evolved from a simple pipe to a more  
complex "header" device- a ring with spray inlets on top of the core. Recent  
PWRs have supplemented their small-break response capability with "charg­ing pumps'' that can operate at higher pressures than the high-pressure coolant  
injection system.  
The ECCS in PWRs is served by sumps within the primary containment  
designed to collect the reactor coolant lost from the primary system in the event  
of a LOCA so it may be recirculated into the core. RG 1.82, issued in 1974,  
specified that the containment have two sumps, one for each of the redundant  
halves of the ECCS. They must be physically separated from each other and  
from high-energy piping systems to prevent a pipe break from initiating a  
LOCA and also disabling part of the ECCS. The guide also included design  
specifications to ensure that sump intake systems effectively collect water  
without introducing air through the suction intakes of the recirculating pumps.  
Trash racks and fine-mesh screens were required to protect sumps from LOCA­generated missiles and prevent clogging with debris such as insulation that  
could be ripped off by a pipe rupture. The vendors have also had to build  
elaborate scale models to test the ability of different sump configurations to  
recirculate cooling water to the ECCS.  
Residual Heat Removal: Reactor fission products continue to generate  
''decay heat'' after insertion of control rods has terminated the nuclear chain  
reaction. Reactors therefore contain a residual heat removal (RHR) system  
designed to operate at low pressures for days or even months after an accident,  
when the higher-pressure ECCS systems may not be able to remove the  
substantial decay heat still being produced. It comprises steam lines, feed­water systems, heat exchangers, and parts of the ECCS.  
The NRC's Reactor Safety Study (WASH-1400) concluded that a melt­down was more likely to result from inability to remove decay heat than from  
failure of the ECCS to replace primary coolant directly after a large pipe break.  
RG 1.139 upgrades the RHR system at new plants by requiring that it be built to  
"safety-grade" quality (subject to quality assurance) and with sufficient re­dundancy to be operable despite a single failure (e.g., to power supply).  
Interlocks, valves, and controls must be provided to ensure that the system is  
activated only on low reactor coolant system pressure to guarantee that it is  
available after an accident. Pressure relief capacity is required to prevent  
damage from accidental overpressurization, and any fluid discharged through  
relief valves must be collected to avoid flooding safety-related equipment or  
interfering with the ECCS.  
Although the guide is directed only at construction permit applications  
docketed after 1977, some of its provisions have been carried out at currently  
operating plants, for example, interlocks to isolate the RHR system from the  
98 Chapter4 reactor coolant system. The problems encountered in maintaining long-term  
cooling at Three Mile Island and the more recent loss of decay heat removal  
capability for several hours at Davis-Besse may cause many of the provisions  
of RG I. 139 to be applied to plants under construction, as discussed in Section  
6.2.  
The Reactor Coolant System: The pumps, pipes, valves, tanks, and  
related equipment which continuously circulate primary coolant water during  
normal operation are referred to as the reactor coolant system (RCS). This  
system was refined during the 1970s both to ·improve plant performance  
reliability and to reduce accident risks.  
Cracking of RCS pipes and other metal components has been the single  
largest cause of nuclear plant shutdowns. BWRs have developed cracks in  
ECCS core spray piping and in ''recirculation'' pipes in the normal circulating  
water system. PWRs have developed cracks in steam generator tubes and,  
more recently, support structures. Most of the cracks require prompt repair  
since they affect the reactor coolant pressure boundary and thus are safety­related. High radiation fields sometimes make the cracks difficult to diagnose  
and repair.  
Design changes have been made at newer plants in an effort to reduce  
cracking incidence by keeping corrosion-inducing impurities out of the coolant  
system. These are primarily metals and salts that may leak through the con­denser and flow directly to the '.'secondary" side ofPWR steam generators and  
into the BWR primary coolant system. Both reactor types have upgraded their  
"condensate demineralizers" - ion-exchanging resins which filter out dis­solved solids. RG 1.56 has further required that BWRs, which have a direct  
cycle that makes the reactor core especially susceptible to solids deposition,  
install meters at the condenser and demineralizer inlet and outlet to record flow  
and conductivity. The meters trigger control room alarms when the chemical  
content of the water reaches high levels.  
The cracking problem has also led to costly materials changes in circula­ting water systems at some new plants. Copper is increasingly being sup­planted in condensers by titanium, which is more resistant to chemical attack,  
particularly by chlorides in seawater. Stainless steel is replacing carbon steel  
in steam generator support plates, and new techniques of heat-treating stain­less steel and of cladding welds are being applied to BWR piping to improve  
resistance to stress. Funds have also been expended in analysis and testing.  
Utilities in the PWR "Steam Generator Owners Group" have spent several  
tens of millions of dollars since 1977 on EPRI programs, and the vendors have  
matched this with outlays on their own steam generator research facilities.  
A critical RCS component at BWRs is the main steam isolation valves  
(MSIVs) on the steam lines connecting the reactor vessel to the steam turbine.  
They are designed to isolate the RCS in the event of a break in a coolant pipe or  
in a steam line outside containment. Chronic MSIV leakage led the NRC to  
Chapter4 99 issue RG I. 96 in 1975, requiring leakage control systems for all BWRs with  
construction permits granted after February !970. (This includes the last two  
BWRs in the data base employed to calculate nuclear capital cost increases­Fitzpatrick and Duane Arnold.) The systems consist of supplementary valves,  
vents, ducts, interlocks, and associated instrumentation and circuitry. The  
components must meet seismic and quality assurance criteria and must func­tion despite LOCAs, missiles, pipe whipping, or water jets. Substantial costs  
appear to have been involved for the high-quality equipment and supporting  
engineering analysis.  
An earlier regulatory guide, RG 1.45, required equipment to detect  
reactor coolant leakage into the containment in order to reduce radioactivity in  
the plant and to abort potential LOCAs. Three or more monitoring systems  
must be employed, for sump level and flow, for airborne particulate radio­activity, and for condensate flow rate or airborne gaseous radioactivity. They  
must be able to distinguish normal, small leakage in equipment that can't be  
made leaktight (e.g .. valve stem packing glands, pump shaft seals) from  
ab'normal leakage with potential safety significance. The detection  
systems must also be able to locate leaks and report them to the control room  
through indicators and alarms. The guide also urged use of sensors to detect  
changes in temperature and humidity.  
Ultimate Heat Sink: Piping and intake requirements outside of the  
reactor coolant system were upgraded by RG 1.27 to ensure that the plant's  
water source river, pond, cooling tower, etc.- can supply water to operate  
the residual heat removal system at sufficiently cool temperatures for at least a  
month after an accident. The guide's most recent revision in 1976 requires two  
separate sets of intake structures and piping routes, both designed to withstand  
an Operating Basis Earthquake (see Section 4.5) and sized according to severe  
historical climate conditions.  
Reactor Core Equipment: Designs of reactor vessels, fuel and control  
rod assemblies, and supporting structures have changed little since the earliest  
commercial plants. Several changes have added slightly to costs, however.  
Newer plants and some older ones have added more neutron detectors to  
monitor reactor power fluxes. These reduce uncertainties in fuel "peaking  
factors" so that reactors can be operated closer to design capacity without  
violating the fuel temperature restrictions imposed by the revised ECCS  
criteria. Similarly, RG 1.20 has required utilities and vendors to develop  
baseline core vibration data prior to startup to validate analytical models which  
estimate vibration during plant operation - a response to early instances of  
flow-induced vibration affecting core support structures and control rod as­semblies at many plants. Third, General Electric has divided the hydraulic  
drive system for control rods into separated banks, each of which covers  
enough of the core geometry to reduce the likelihood that a single equipment  
100 Chapter4 failure could prevent reactor "scram" (rapid insertion of control rods).  
Tests and Monitoring: Testing and inspection of reactor core and  
cooling systems also grew in the 1970s. RG I. 133 mandated that recent plants  
include automatic systems to detect loose parts that may be left in the reactor  
during construction or maintenance or that may be deposited in the primary  
coolant system from component failure. Disengaged parts can damage or wear  
out critical, hard-to-repair equipment, block coolant flow, or jam the control  
rods. Most detection systems place up to a dozen pairs of redundant sensors in  
the reactor vessel and PWR steam generators and include amplifiers to magnify  
signals and cabling to transmit them to the control room. The members of each  
pair of instrumentation channels must be physically separated, and the sys­tem's operability must be verifiable through in-service inspection.  
Two other regulatory guides issued in I 974 mandate special test and  
inspection programs for PWRs. RG 1.79 requires that PWR operators run  
through tests of ECCS components and system response prior to fuel loading  
under both cold and (simulated) hot operating conditions. This necessitates  
filling the containment sump with water and draining it before start-up. (Pre­operational ECCS testing is less eventful for BWRS because the suppression  
pool sump is kept filled.) RG I .83 specifies inservice inspection requirements  
to detect corrosion and cracking in PWR steam generator tubes. The guide  
mandates pre-service inspection of all tubes to establish baseline conditions as  
well as regular inspections during plant operation.  
Equipment Quality: NRC regulations require that the reactor core and  
its cooling systems be designed, fabricated, and installed in accordance with  
the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code (see Section 4.5). It is beyond the  
scope of this study to trace the evolution of ASME nuclear plant standards, but  
several AEC/NRC regulatory guides in particular have extended the ASME  
requirements, adding to fabrication and installation costs.  
Section 50.55a of 10 CFR 50, adopted in 1972, applied the stringent  
''Class I'' quality standards of Section III of the ASME Code to the reactor  
pressure vessel and to components of the reactor coolant pressure boundary  
(see definition in Section 4.5) whose failure could prevent reactor shutdown or  
cooldown. Starting the same year, RG 1.26 applied the substantial (although  
less stringent) ''Class 2'' ASME standards to other significant cooling system  
components: pressure vessels, piping, pumps, and valves of the reactor cool­ant pressure boundary that were excluded from Section 50.55a, and much of  
the ECCS, the RHR system, and equipment to remove fission products and  
heat from the containment after accidents.  
In the following year, RG 1.65 strengthened the ASME standards for  
bolts and studs which fasten the pressure vessel head, requiring them to be  
forged from particularly tough and durable steels that are quenched and  
tempered under closely controlled procedures. RG 1.67 applied the ASME  
Chapter4 !OJ Code to piping subjected to large reaction forces from pressure discharges  
from safety valves and relief valves. The guide required that the maximum  
stress-inducing sequence of valve openings be assumed in determining poss­ible piping stresses, thus contributing further to pipe strength requirements.  
Several early regulatory guides upgraded the steel welding and fabrica­tion techniques used in Class I and 2 cooling system components. RG 1.31  
increased testing of weld materials used to fabricate and join components made  
of austenitic stainless steel - a nickel-chromium alloy steel used in much  
primary system piping and components. RG 1.43 required closer control of  
welding techniques for applying austenitic steel claddings to surfaces of  
forgings and platings made of stronger but less ductile ferritic steel. RG 1.44  
required carefully controlled solution heat treating and similar measures to be  
used in manufacturing Class I and 2 component stainless steels in order to  
reduce contaminants that could induce stress corrosion cracking. RG 1.50  
specified close monitoring of welding for low-alloy structural steel com­ponents to avoid heat variations that can enhance cracking.  
Section 4.8: Containment Structures And Systems  
The containment structure of a nuclear power plant is generally a steel­and-concrete shell enclosing the reactor coolant system. It contains machinery  
to remove heat, radioactive particles, and combustible gases from the con­tainment atmosphere to minimize radiation releases and ensure that the con­tainment structure remains intact despite high pressures and temperatures  
generated during accidents. Together, the containment and its systems are  
major "engineered safeguards" intended to prevent the release of radio­activity from reactor accidents and to protect the reactor coolant system from  
natural phenomena.  
Containment structures and systems have evolved gradually since the  
first commercial-size reactors. Containment shells have generally been made  
thicker to accommodate increases in design-basis "loads" resulting from  
asymmetric (non-uniform) pressures and earthquakes. Design and environ­mental requirements for "penetrations" which convey piping, electrical  
cables, and other equipment through the containment wall have been upgraded  
to prevent leakage throughout the course of postulated accidents. Post­accident "air cleanup" systems to control radioactivity have been designed to  
more stringent standards. And quality assurance and testing requirements have  
been toughened for construction materials in the containment shell and for  
some containment systems. These changes had a modest but noticeable impact  
on nuclear plant costs in the 1970s.  
102 Chapter4 Containment Designs:g Containment structures vary in design configu­ration and material composition. The "full-pressure" containment employed  
by a majority of PWRs has a several-foot-thick wall of reinforced or pre­stressed concrete to withstand internally generated pressures and an inner  
lining of one-quarter to one-half inch-thick welded steel to provide a leaktight  
membrane. A prominent variant of this design is a double containment struc­ture in which a thicker, pressure-withstanding steel shell is surrounded by a  
concrete shield building, with filtering equipment in the several-foot space in  
between.  
A different design, the ''ice-condenser'' containment used in some large  
Westinghouse plants, maintains large stores of ice in an annular region be­tween the reactor coolant system and the inner containment wall. The ice  
provides a heat sink to significantly reduce pressure build-up in case of  
accidents. This permits a 10-20% reduction in the containment diameter.h  
The BWR "pressure-suppression" containment design is similar in  
general concept to the ice-condenser, but water is used instead of ice as the  
steam-condensing heat sink. The reactor vessel and coolant system are housed  
in a "dry-well" structure that is connected by large vent pipes to a surround­ing, water-filled pressure-suppression chamber. In the event of an accident,  
steam from the drywell would fiow through the partly submerged vents and  
condense, reducing the maximum pressure reached. The "Mark I" contain­ments in operating BWRs employ steel walls for both the drywell and the  
donut-shaped pressure-suppression chamber. Concrete, steel-lined vessels are  
used in later BWR containments: the Mark II design used in eleven BWRs now  
in construction, in which the suppression chamber is under the drywell; and the  
later Mark III now in design and construction, in which the suppression  
chamber surrounds the drywell.  
Changes in Containment Structures: Although the diversity of con­tainment designs precludes quantification, containment structures were gen­erally made thicker and stronger during the 1970s in response to increases in  
postulated dynamic loads during accidents. Seismic loads were generally  
higher for later plants, primarily because of changes in calculational tech­niques for translating anticipated earthquake motion into predicted structural  
responses (see discussion in Section 4.5). Tornado loads were similarly higher  
g. Much of the discussion of containment design and materials is drawn from W.H.  
Stiegelmann and C.P. Tan. "Containment-System Design and Construction Practices in the  
United States." Reactor and Fuel-Processing Technology. 12 (No. 2), I 51-172 (1969).  
h. Cook I and 2 are the only ice-condenser plants in the nuclear data base. Their costs  
were several percent higher than would have been expected for plants of their size. chronology,  
etc. -a statistically insignificant difference. Tennessee Valley Authority's Sequoyah I and 2  
and Duke Power's McGuire I and 2 are ice-condenser plants scheduled for 1981 start·up. The low  
design pressure of ice-condenser plants has been a source of concern since Three Mile Island. as  
discussed in Chapter 6.  
Chapter4 !03 for some later plants. The result was an increase in the quantity of steel  
reinforcing bars and tensioned steel cables ("tendons") required for concrete  
containments using reinforced and pre-stressed concrete, respectively.  
Structural improvements also arose from more conservative loading  
criteria. Regulatory Guide I .57 increased the design requirements for steel in  
containment lining, containment penetration assemblies, and piping systems  
attached to the containment or to its penetrations (see Section 4.5). A new  
"Code for Concrete Reactor Vessels and Containments" added to the ASME  
Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code in 1975 (applied in draft form in the early  
I 970s) increased the volume of concrete and steel considered necessary to  
maintain structural integrity under postulated loads. The code was subse­quently endorsed by RG I. 136.  
In addition, AEC/NRC- and vendor-sponsored accident research identi­fied situations such as "asymmetric blowdown loads" that had previously  
been overlooked and which required increased containment wall thicknesses  
(see discussion in Chapter 3). Similarly, General Electric discovered that  
accidents could generate severe vibratory pressures on its pressure-suppres­sion containments, such as "steam-chugging"- periodic rushes of water up  
the discharge vents causing pressure spikes." This led to increases in BWR  
steel containment wall thicknesses, greater steel placement in reinforced  
concrete containments, and stronger supports for pipes and other equipment in  
the suppression-pool area. 34 These changes affected several later plants in the  
data base but will be felt primarily at plants under construction. The vendors  
have already expended significant funds in developing and operating test  
facilities and computer simulation models to analyze the effects of the newly  
identified loads.  
Containment vessel construction techniques also came under closer  
AEC/NRC scrutiny in the 1970s and were upgraded in regulatory guides. In  
addition, many of the guides apply to interior concrete and steel structures  
which support, house, and separate reactor equipment and engineered safety  
systems, such as reactor vessels, PWR steam generators, and reactor coolant  
pumps. Regulatory Guides 1.10 and I. 15 upgraded the testing and sampling of  
"rebars" - steel reinforcing bars which add strength to concrete- and of  
mechanical splices that join rebars together. RG 1.18 mandated testing of  
containment leak-tightness prior to start-up, and RG 1.19 required radio­graphic examination of welds in containment steel liners and penetrations. RG  
1.35 strengthened inservice inspection requirements for tendons in prestressed  
concrete containments, modifying anchoring hardware so it would be acces­sible for periodic post-construction examinations.  
Two later regulatory guides had more sweeping impacts. RG 1.55 re­quired upgraded methods of placing concrete to solve "recurring problems of  
voids, cracks, and bulges" in nuclear plant concrete structures, especially in  
critical but hard-to-inspect areas such as foundation mats and containment  
walls. It directed licensees to monitor shop drawings and construction and  
104 Chapter4 to upgrade concrete-placing equipment to ensure that rebar and concrete  
installations satisfied design pressure specifications and minimized voids.  
ANSI Std N45.2.5, endorsed by RG 1.94, strengthened quality assurance  
requirements for the major construction uses of concrete and structural steel:  
foundation preparation, formwork, steel reinforcement, and embedded items  
such as anchor bolts. The standard upgraded specifications for cement and  
aggregates used in making concrete and reduced permissible variations in  
moisture content, temperature, and surface characteristics in curing and  
finishing concrete. The ANSI standard also required that more qualification  
splices be inspected and tested prior to splicing rebars and toughened inspec­tion of most major steel construction including erection, fastening and bolting,  
welding, protective painting, and cleaning.  
Containment Penetrations: Containment vessels cannot be built com­pletely sealed. They are equipped with hundreds of "penetrations"- sleeves  
welded to the steel containment plate or liner and embedded in the concrete  
wall- to enable piping and electrical cables to convey water, steam, power,  
and electrical signals between the containment interior and buildings housing  
key equipment such as the steam turbine, the control room, and auxiliary and  
safety system pumps. A containment vessel must also contain access hatches  
for equipment and personnel, and it is joined with thousands of construction  
welds. Equipment· standards and testing requirements to reduce radiation  
leakage through these penetrations, hatches, and welds were upgraded during  
the 1970s.  
RGI. I I, issued in 1971, required that isolation valves be added to  
reactor instrument lines. These are small-diameter conduits that continuously  
convey primary coolant samples outside containment to measure the status of  
key reactor parameters. In the event of a rupture in instrument lines outside  
containment, the isolation valves must be capable of closing on both automatic  
signals and control room initiation to minimize primary coolant leakage.  
Otherwise they must remain open to maintain coolant sample monitoring. RG  
I. I I also required instrumentation to indicate closed or open valve position in  
the control room and specified inspection and separation criteria to prevent  
failure of redundant lines.  
Main steam lines, feedwater piping, and auxiliary and safety system  
piping convey fluids through the containment as well. Isolation valves for  
these piping systems must also be capable of preserving containment boundary  
integrity to prevent the escape of radioactivity, while allowing normal or  
emergency passage of fluids. ANSI Std N271, endorsed by RG I. 143, applied  
the RG I. II requirements for valve actuation, status indication, and physical  
separation to these isolation valves. The standard also specified that isolation  
valves in series be actuated by independent power sources, stipulated rapid  
valve closing times, required that valves be protected against missiles and the  
effects of pipe ruptures, and applied Seismic Category I requirements to ensure  
Chapter4 105 that they can close and re-open as necessary during earthquakes.  
Electric cables are conveyed into containment through electric pene­tration assemblies- insulated electric conductors and conductor and aperture  
seals which together maintain a leak-tight pressure barrier between the inside  
and outside of the containment structure. Detailed design, material, and  
qualification requirements for electric penetration assemblies were developed  
in IEEE Std 317 (twice revised and endorsed by RG 1.63). They include  
grounded barriers to separate different-voltage conductors; ability to with­stand fires, high radiation, and current surges; and testing under a variety of  
adverse conditions including high temperature, pressure, humidity, chemical  
spray, and simulated aging (see Section 4.3).  
General Design Criterion No. 53 stipulated general testing requirements  
for measuring containment leakage through both individual penetrations and  
the entire containment structure prior to start-up. Appendix J to 10 CFR 50  
added specific testing requirements in 1973. 35 It expanded the tests to cover a  
range of pressure differentials approximating potential accident conditions and  
upgraded them to employ advanced leak-detection methods and to include  
detailed reporting of test conditions.  
Containment Systems: Systems for removing heat, radioactive gases,  
and combustible gases from the containment atmosphere following accidents  
changed little in basic concept but underwent extensive refinement during the  
1970s. Nuclear plants contain multi-purpose containment spray systems. In  
the event of a LOCA they would condense steam, reducing pressure and  
thereby reducing leakage; provide long-term cooling of the containment and its  
contents; and precipitate and "scrub" radioactive iodine particles from the  
containment atmosphere. Later plants have higher-capacity spray systems  
with an increased number of spray ring headers around the containment dome  
to ensure coverage of the containment volume, and they are also designed for  
automatic initiation on indication of high containment pressure. RG 1.82 also  
mandated improvements in the sumps which collect the spray and spilled  
coolant at the bottom of PWR containments for recirculation: redundant,  
separated sumps; screens and racks to prevent clogging and to protect sumps  
from missiles; and design improvements to prevent vortexing.  
Reactors also contain a post-accident air-cleaning system to remove  
accident-generated fission products from the containment atmosphere. It con­sists of a multiplicity of filters, adsorbers, fans, cooling coils, etc., which, in  
addition to removing airborne radioactivity, also cools the atmosphere and  
thereby supplements the containment spray system. To ensure that the system  
can function under post-accident conditions, RG 1.52 has required that at later  
plants it include redundant, physically separated equipment trains, be pro­tected from pressure surges by relief valves, and be built to more stringent  
seismic and quality assurance standards.  
A LOCA can cause hydrogen gas to form and accumulate within the  
106 Chapter4 containment through chemical reactions between overheated fuel cladding and  
the reactor coolant or by releasing radiolytic hydrogen generated by the  
decomposition of the cooling water. RG I. 7, issued in 197 J and twice revised,  
required the capability to measure and reduce hydrogen concentrations ranging  
up to 5% of the maximum potential from the cladding-coolant reaction. The  
installed equipment generally includes recombiners consisting of a reaction  
chamber, fans, and valves to collect and gradually heat the hydrogen to react  
(oxidize) it harmlessly to form water. Because the cladding-coolant reaction  
reached at least a 25% level at Three Mile Island, future and even existing  
plants may be required to increase their recombiner capability.  
Section 4.9: Systems For Electric Power, Instrumentation,  
And Control  
Reactor functions and mechanical systems in nuclear plants are woven  
together and regulated by networks of sensors, controls, actuators, circuits,  
and power sources which monitor plant conditions, transmit operator com­mands, and activate equipment. This equipment comprises two systems: the  
electric power system and the instrumentation and control system. Although  
the two systems function separately, they consist of equipment that is some­what similar (e.g., cables, relays, electrical penetrations) or is manufactured  
from very similar materials. As a consequence, both systems have been  
affected similarly by increased design and quality requirements; hence they are  
discussed together here.  
These requirements fall into three broad areas: (i) increased system  
requirements, such as the number of plant variables to be monitored or the  
pow,er requirements of safety equipment; (ii) increased redundancy and  
separation to ensure that electrical and control systems function despite equip­ment failure; and (iii) upgrading of standards and tests for individual com­ponents and equipment items to provide increased confidence that they will  
perform their needed functions. Major changes added significantly to costs in  
each area. The third area, standards and tests, was discussed in Section 4.3;  
this section treats increased system requirements and redundancy and separa­tion criteria.  
Many of the changes were stipulated in standards (detailed rules of  
practice) issued by the Institute of Electrical and Electroni<;s Engineers  
(IEEE). Over two dozen IEEE standards pertaining to nuclear plant electrical  
systems and equipment were issued in the I 970s and subsequently adopted by  
AEC/NRC (with modest amendments) as regulatory guides. Due to the com­plexity of the standards and because many of them were applied as drafts to  
reactor design and licensing reviews, it is not possible here to identify which  
generation of plants was (or will be) the first affected by each provision of each  
standard. The discussion of IEEE standards is therefore offered as a general  
Chapter4 107 account of the major changes in electrical equipment and instrumentation and  
control systems.  
Equipment Redundancy and Separation: Electrical equipment and sys­tems that are essential to shut down the reactor and to operate engineered  
safeguards such as the ECCS are designated as Class IE equipment. The  
General Design Criteria stipulate that Class IE equipment must satisfy the  
"single failure criterion," i.e .. the failure of any single "active" component  
or piece of equipment- the failure of a motor or sensor, for example- must  
not prevent accomplishment of any vital safety "functions." The primary  
means of complying with this criterion - providing redundant, mutually  
separated and independently operated "divisions" of Class IE equipment­was applied with increased stringency during the 1970s.  
The major statement of criteria for power supplies for electrical equip­ment is IEEE Std 308. It establishes design criteria to ensure that power is  
available for Class 1 E instrumentation and control systems and for electrical  
components of engineered safeguards. It also establishes criteria for the nor­mal and emergency power systems themselves, which are needed in the event  
of failure in the circuits connecting the plant to the utility's transmission  
network. They include: (i) batteries to supply d/c power for vital instrumen­tation and controls; (ii) a back-up source of a/c power- on-site standby diesel  
generators to supply power to motors driving pumps, fans, and valve  
actuators in systems needed to mitigate the consequences of accidents (e.g.,  
ECCS, hydrogen controls, and containment cooling) and bring the plant to a  
safe shutdown condition; and (iii) power distribution systems to connect these  
power sources to the equipment that requires it.  
IEEE Std 308 essentially stipulates that all electrical equipment in the  
vital systems named above must be provided in two or more independent,  
redundant divisions. For example, tltere must be two or more separate feeder  
lines from the plant to the transmission network, and two or more diesel  
generators and battery supplies, each connected separately to independent sets  
of safeguard equipment which are individually capable of shutting down and  
cooling the reactor. Vital instruments must also have two or more independent  
power supplies and two or more separate circuits to transmit data to the control  
room.  
Although some of these requirements were specified prior to issuance of  
IEEE Std 308 in 1970 (in draft editions of the General Design Criteria), that  
and later editions have applied them more firmly and to a greater range of  
equipment. For example, the standard required that auxiliary devices (pro­viding cooling, lubrication, etc.) needed to operate electrical equipment re­ceive their power supply from the same bus section so that loss of power in one  
load group would not disable the other load group. The 1978 edition of the  
standard required physical separation of redundant circuits to the off-site grid  
(not required in the General Design Criteria). That edition also barred auto­108 Chapter4 matic transfer of electric loads between redundant power supply buses and  
added electrical equipment in engineered safeguards systems to the group  
requiring separation. These requirements have effected a significant increase  
in the amount of electrical equipment required to be installed in nuclear plants,  
and the items added must satisfy stringent performance requirements and  
quality standards.  
IEEE Std 308 was endorsed in several regulatory guides, particularly RG  
!. 6 and RG 1. 32, which were issued in the early 1970s and appear to have  
influenced revisions of the standard. RG 1.41 required pre-operational testing  
to verify that redundant load groups (e.g., engineered safeguard systems) were  
assigned to independent power sources. RG 1.81 prohibits sharing of a/c and  
d/c power sources and distribution systems at multi-unit plants, such as  
providing only one "swing diesel" to simultaneously back up both units'  
diesel generators. This requirement stems from concern that a short circuit  
could keep the swing diesel tied to one plant and unavailable for the other. It is  
primarily aimed at future plants, where it will add a diesel generator and  
battery capability to the emergency power supply.  
Requirements governing separation of electric power sources, electric  
circuits, and other Class IE electric equipment were also significantly up­graded in the 1970s. IEEE Std 279 first stated general separation criteria in  
1968. Specific guidelines were subsequently delineated in IEEE Std 384 and  
endorsed in Regulatory Guide I. 7 5. IEEE Std 384 extended separation criteria  
to major new classes of electrical equipment: redundant Class IE instruments  
must be located in separate cabinets or compartments; electric penetrations  
conveying redundant Class IE circuits through the containment must be widely  
dispersed around its circumference; auxiliary systems essential to functioning  
of Class IE equipment, such as ventilation systems for switchgear, cooling  
water systems for motors, and fuel oil supply systems for emergency diesel  
generators, were required to be provided in redundant, physically separated  
pairs. Std 384 also barred power cables from the cable spreading area, where  
instrumentation and control cables converge priorto entering the control room,  
unless they are contained in embedded conduits or similar enclosed structures.  
The minimum separation distances specified in IEEE Std 384 frequently  
exceeded past practice. In addition, the standard required greater protection of  
Class IE equipment from external hazards. Although fires, missiles, vibration,  
pipe whip. water sprays, and high-energy electrical switchgear were all men­tioned as important design considerations in Std 279, they received much  
greater emphasis in Std 384. The standard also mandated protection of Class  
IE equipment from possible high radiation, pressure, temperature, and humid­ity due to failure of operation of plant mechanical systems.  
Finally, IEEE Std 384 supplemented physical separation with electrical  
isolation to maintain independence of redundant circuits and equipment. Class  
IE power circuits must be protected from their redundant counterparts and  
from non-Class IE circuits by circuit breakers, input current limiters, and  
Chapter4 109 other isolation devices to ensure that they are not degraded by current tran­sients or other high voltage sources. Similarly, instrumentation and control  
circuits must be pr:otected from electrical interference (e.g., electromagnetic  
induction) by filtering circuits, grounding, or shielding or by isolation devices  
such as amplifiers, fuses, or transducers.  
The increased separation requirements substantially increased the length  
of cables needed for circuitry and the volume of structures required to support,  
shield, and separate the increased quantity of equipment. The increases have  
been especially marked for instrumentation and control circuits because of the  
expanding number of variables requiring mo"nitoring. More engineering effort  
has also been expended to analyze the vulnerability of greater amounts of  
electrical equipment to accidents and environmental hazards.  
Emergency Power Sources: The standby a/c power system, powered  
by large diesel generators, provides the energy to drive safeguard systems in  
the event of an accident and simultaneous loss of off-site power. The standby  
d/c power system, powered by lead-acid batteries, provides energy for plant  
instrumentation and controls, including the starting controls of the diesels.  
Both systems are considered vital to safety, and so are subsumed in the  
preceding discussions of equipment redundancy, separation, and qualification  
(in Section 4.3) for Class IE equipment. This section treats changes in design  
and equipment requirements specific to the diesels and the batteries.  
Diesel and battery power capacities grew relative to plant generating  
capacity in the 1970s. This was due to growth in emergency electric loads  
(e.g., ECCS pumps) and to performance problems demonstrating a need for  
greater standby power design margins. IEEE Std 387 and AEC Regulatory  
Guide I. 9, both issued in the early 1970s, reduced permissible frequency and  
voltage fluctuations by diesel generators during starting of emergency loads.  
Together with the increased load sizes, this doubled average diesel generator  
capacities from 2-2.5 MW in the early 1970s to 4.5-5 MW for recently  
completed plants. Battery capacities also increased because of the expanding  
number of vital instrumentation and control functions. RG 1.32 required  
battery chargers to be sized according to the largest possible total loads and  
thus added to their capacity requirements.  
Improvements in quality assurance, installation-design, and auxiliary  
systems also added to diesel and battery equipment and installation costs.  
Recent revisions of IEEE Std 387 and RG 1. 9 required elaborate instrumenta­tion of systems for start-up, lubrication, fuel supply, and cooling as well as of  
the generator itself. The diesels must also be designed with controls, bypasses,  
and instrumentation to allow testing while the plant is operating. IEEE Std 484  
and RG !.128 specified criteria for battery location, mounting, ventilation,  
and instrumentation to provide protection from adverse conditions such as fire  
and pipe whipping. Temperature differentials between battery cells must be  
minimized, and the batteries must be mounted with embedded anchor bolts or  
110 Chapter4 racks welded to structural steel plates for seismic restraint.  
Instrumentation and Control Systems: Monitoring and control devices  
necessary for safe reactor shutdown are also subject to the Class IE equipment  
requirements discussed earlier. This section treats other requirements specific  
to instrumentation and control functions: in-service testing, bypassed status  
indication, control rooms and panels, and instrumentation to follow accidents.  
Much instrumentation and control equipment is intended to operate only  
in emergencies. Since such equipment ordinarily does not generate enough  
performance data to measure its reliability, it has been subjected to expanded  
in-service testing. IEEE Stds 279 and 338 and RGs 1.22 and 1. 118 require  
periodic testing of vital instrumentation and control equipment, including  
testing electrical channels independently to detect loss of redundancy.  
To determine equipment functionality without shutting the plant, many  
utilities have installed additional signal-generating devices, relays, and cir­cuitry allowing testing of component reliability without activating the system  
functions themselves. This has increased the number of channels in the logic  
systems which activate plant equipment. Conventional "two out of three"  
logic systems were activated if a majority of the three channels registered a  
positive signal; these have increasingly been supplanted by • 'two out of five''  
systems which can activate equipment despite failure of one channel while  
another is down for repair and a third is out for testing.  
IEEE Std 279 mandated that the control room be equipped with indica­tors to signal the unavailability- due to test or maintenance- of electrical or  
mechanical equipment needed for safe shutdown. Operating incidents in which  
tagging of bypassed valves or switches failed to make operators aware of  
equipment unavailability led the AEC to stipulate in RG 1.47 that automatic  
indication of the bypassing or inoperability of safety-related equipment be  
provided in the control room. i This has required additional signal-transmitting  
circuitry from each safety-related component or equipment item to the control  
room - a major source of the additional conduits into the control room that  
have required buffering and spacing to satisfy physical and electrical isolation  
criteria.  
RGs I. 78 and 1.95 require that control rooms at newer plants be kept  
habitable and functional despite spillage of hazardous chemicals. New plants  
have installed redundant, physically separated instrumentation divisions to  
detect chlorine (used in circulating water systems and other auxiliary systems)  
and other chemicals. Equipment to isolate the control room from its vicinity, to  
filter outside air, and to provide a breathable air supply has also been upgraded  
i. In the Three Mile Island accident. discovery of blocked valves closing off emergency  
feed water lines was delayed because maintenance tags on the console (the old method of bypassed  
indication) covered the indicator lights (the new method)- a truly mischievous common-mode  
failure.  
Chapter4 Ill to meet the single-failure criterion.  
The General Design Criteria require that reactors be designed so that  
operators can shut down the plant from outside the control room. It had been  
standard practice to provide "control panels" beside major equipment, but  
fires at Indian Point I in 1972 (initiated by Unit 2 construction) and at Browns  
Ferry in 1975 (in which smoke hindered control room action) pointed up the  
need for alternate central control areas. Accordingly, most new plants are  
being built with emergency shutdown rooms in auxiliary buildings. These have  
separate ventilation systems for habitability during accidents and are supplied  
with independent control cables routed outside the primary cable spreading  
room. Prospective changes in control room instrumentation are discussed in  
Section 6. 2.  
Reactor instrumentation designed to monitor plant conditions during  
accidents grew in scope in the 1970s and will almost certainly expand  
markedly in the future. Its purpose is to help operators determine the nature of  
an accident, the response of plant safety features to automatic and manual  
commands, and the response of the plant to the safety measures. Systems  
requiring monitoring include the reactor core, the reactor coolant system,  
containment systems, secondary systems such as steam generators, auxiliary  
systems, and power supplies and distribution. Variables measured include  
temperatures, pressures, flow rates, water levels, valve positions, gas concen­trations, and radioactivity.  
RG 1.97, issued in 1975 and significantly toughened two years later,  
increased instrumentation requirements by specifying the plant capabilities  
requiring monitoring and adding design criteria such as physical separation of  
redundant channels and seismic protection. It applied mostly to future con­struction starts, however, and largely permitted the licensee to determine the  
specific instrumentation to be installed. A pending revision of RG 1. 9736  
identifies each of the hundreds of instruments required and their measurement  
ranges. Many of its provisions are likely to be applied to plants under con­struction and, perhaps, to operating plants, as discussed in Section 6.2.  
The instrumentation systems are extensive and costly, especially as  
provided by the proposed revision. The instruments and their circuitry to the  
control room must be capable of operating under extreme conditions for the  
anticipated duration of postulated accidents. Containment-pressure instru­ments at future plants, for example, must be able to register at least three times  
the design pressure for concrete and four times that for steel. Many instruments  
must also include recording capability for diagnoses during and after acci­dents.  
Section 4.10: Radiation Control Systems  
Radionuclides produced by nuclear plants can affect public health in  
112 Chapter4 three broad ways:  
• through continuous release of small quantities to the environ­ment during routine operation;  
• through large releases during possible reactor accidents; and  
• through exposure of plant workers to radiation during main­tenance, repair, and normal operation.  
Equipment for controlling radiation releases from accidents was dis­cussed in Section 4.8. This section considers radiation waste ("radwaste")  
control for routine emissions, which was significantly upgraded in the 1970s,  
and design and equipment changes to reduce occupational exposures, which  
will be reflected primarily in future capital costs.  
Releases During Routine Operation: In 1969, with only a handful of  
operating reactors but with dozens under construction and many hundreds  
projected, public concern over "routine" reactor emissions was aroused by  
charges by two senior AEC scientists that subjecting all Americans to legally  
permissible doses of radioactivity could cause up to 32,000 cancer deaths per  
year. Although actual radiation exposures from operating reactors were con­siderably less than the allowable doses, in June 1971 the AEC proposed to  
reduce the permissible release levels approximately a hundred-fold at both  
operating and new reactors. The proposal was formally adopted as a regulation  
in 1975 (Appendix I to 10 CFR 50), consistent with the basic objective that  
"exposures should be as low as practicable.'' It required virtually all licensees  
to augment their waste-treatment systems and procedures. Although the im­provements did not need to achieve a full hundred-fold reduction, radwaste  
treatment systems on both old and new plants are now considerably more  
elaborate than those originally installed on early plants.  
Reactors produce radionuclides directly through nuclear fission and  
indirectly through neutron bombardment of impurities dissolved in reactor  
primary coolant. The primary radwaste source is the gaseous waste stream,  
consisting of gaseous radionuclides and particles such as iodine which are  
carried through ventilation systems. It is processed by several types of equip­ment: "hold-up" tanks detain gases with short half-lives until they have lost  
most of their radioactivity, and impregnated activated carbon adsorbers and  
"high efficiency particulate air" (HEPA) filters remove iodine and other  
radioactive particles from the gas stream. Associated with the tanks and filters  
are heating and cooling coils to regulate humidity before the gas stream reaches  
the filters and adsorbers, fans and ductwork to route the gas stream through the  
plant, and insttumentation to monitor radionuclide concentrations. Finally,  
"recombiners" mix potentially explosive hydrogen gas (generated through  
radio lytic decomposition of primary coolant water} with oxygen in a controlled  
catalytic reaction to yield water again and reduce the volume of the contami­Chapter4 113 nated gaseous waste stream. This permits a relatively long "hold-up" of gases  
in the plant to allow radioactive decay to reduce the radioactivity levels.  
All of these systems were upgraded at operating and new reactors in the  
1970s, both to comply with the Appendix I criteria and to satisfy RG 1.140,  
issued in 1978 but employed as an NRC "branch technical position" in !975.  
BWRs produce more radioactive gases than PWRs and have been more affect­ed. In addition to improvements provided by recombiners, hold-up tanks and  
"delay lines" (large buried ducts) were enlarged to expand their storage  
capacities from as little as half-an-hour in some early plants to several weeks or  
months. The efficiency and reliability of HEPA filters have also been im­proved, in part by increasing the number or filters to reduce the load on each.  
Liquid radwaste control systems have also been augmented. Licensees  
have strengthened and expanded demineralizers - systems consisting of  
ion-exchange resins which chemically remove solids dissolved in liquid waste  
as well as remove particulate solids by filtration. "Full-flow" condensate  
demineralizer systems have been added at many new PWRs to protect the  
steam generators and relieve loading on the radwaste demineralizers from the  
occasional flushing of corrosive steam generator impurities. This has required  
additional pressure vessels, piping, instrumentation, and wiring. New plants  
have also added level monitors, floor drains, and extra piping to reduce leakage  
and overflow from pipes and tanks containing radioactive liquids.  
In addition, RG 1.143, also adopted in 1978 but employed as a branch  
technical position since 1975, applied more stringent design criteria to gaseous  
and liquid radwaste systems for seismic protection, pump and valve reliability,  
and integrity of waste-containing pressure valves and piping. RG I. 21,  
adopted in 1971 and later revised, has increased the number of radwaste  
samplers, the frequency of their use, and their capability for measuring smaller  
quantities of a greater variety of radionuclides. Regulatory Guides 1.21 and  
I. 112 have also required that licensees employ more elaborate calculational  
models to quantify radiation releases and translate them to estimated doses  
received by humans. This has added to the scope of programs to trace the  
pathways of radionuclides through the biosphere.  
Solid radwaste systems at nuclear plants consist of centrifuges, settling  
tanks, and waste collection and storage tanks to solidify liquid wastes for  
shipment to offsite burial grounds. These systems underwent few changes in  
the 1970s .. For example, they were exempted from the seismic criteria for  
liquid and gaseous radwaste systems in RG J .143. Most current solidification  
systems leave small amounts of free-standing liquids, however, which render  
the waste containers more susceptible to corrosion and leakage. Costly cement  
solidification systems may be required in the future for complete solidification,  
as discussed in Section 5. I.  
Occupational Exposure to Radiation: Utilities have begun making  
design and equipment changes to reduce levels of worker exposure to radia­I !4 Chapter4 tion, which at most reactors have exceeded early expectations. Total occupa­tional exposures initially averaged approximately 300 person-rems per re­actor-year and have generally increased with reactor age to a current average of  
around 500 person-rems. 37  
Exposures have increased in spite of Regulatory Guide 8.8, which the  
AEC issued in 1973 because of concern with worker exposure ''in view of the  
anticipated growth of nuclear power stations over the next few decades.'' The  
guide did not alter the allowable exposure levels set in 1960- three rems per  
quarter-year, five per year) Rather, it instructed licensees to design, con­struct, and operate reactors so that occupational exposures would be ''as low as  
is reasonably achievable" (ALARA). This meant, in part, that utilities should  
not satisfy per-worker standards simply by hiring more workers to share the  
total dose.  
Utilities themselves have increasingly identified a self-interest in reduc­ing radiation fields and exposures, primarily to avoid using up large numbers  
of workers' exposure allowances in brief stints in high-radiation areas - a  
phenomenon that might eventually lead to crippling increases in shutdown  
times to maintain and repair aging reactors.k Reducing exposures requires  
improvements to plant designs, equipment, monitoring, and management  
control. Most design changes have been reserved for reactors under construc­tion, although some recently installed reactors have made equipment fixes.  
Most changes instituted at operating plants have been less effective admin­istrative changes.  
Exposure-reducing equipment includes fixed monitors to measure radia­tion fields, personnel monitors to measure exposures, and sampling rooms to  
measure radiation concentrations in process equipment. Radiation absorbed in  
servicing radwaste systems can be reduced by employing backflushable filters  
and remote means of changing charcoal adsorbers to reduce radiation concen­trations.  
Design features for reducing worker exposure focus on reducing radia­tion fields and speeding maintenance and repair of the reactor coolant system,  
especially BWR primary system piping and components and PWR steam  
generators- the greatest sources of worker exposure. This includes shielded  
cubicles for high-radiation equipment, providing space for deploying portable  
local shielding, and designing frequently inspected or serviced equipment for  
rapid removal and reassembly. Deposition of radioactive airborne particles  
j. NRC regulations permit 12 rems per ye:ir for workers whose lifetime occupational dose  
does not exceed five· times the difference between their current age and 18. The ALARA  
requirement. however. serves to make the five-rem annual limit the practical upper bound.  
k. Welding of Indian Point I primary system piping in 1970. for example. when the  
reactor was eight years old. required over eight months instead of the several weeks needed for  
comparable but non-radioactive work in a fossil plant. The high radiation field used up Con  
Edison's 60 expert welders and required 50 health physicists and 600 additional personnel.  
complicating outage logistics and raising personnel costs. 38  
Chapter4 115 and gases can also be reduced by careful design of ventilation systems (e.g., to  
avoid pressure gradients from high-radiation areas to frequently visited areas).  
Primary coolant contamination may be diminished by minimizing use of  
materials in primary piping that become highly radioactive under neutron  
bombardment.  
These measures are limited to differing degrees by design trade-offs,  
however. Physical separation and greater space add to length and penetration  
requirements for piping and cables. Ventilation systems are governed by other  
design criteria such as fire-spread prevention and post-accident cleanup.  
Radioactivity-engendering materials such as cobalt and nickel are valued for  
their high corrosion resistance and ductility. Most design changes to reduce  
worker radiation must be analyzed on a whole-systems basis. adding to the  
amount of engineering analysis. Similarly, frequent decontamination to re­duce radiation fields can add to reactor downtime.  
Measures to reduce occuptional exposure have varied among plants.  
Although no definitive analysis of occupational exposure data trends is avail­able, new plants appear to show little, if any, reduction in total dose per unit of  
electric output. This suggests that relatively few exposure-reducing design  
changes have been made to date.1 Greater expenditures will be made at future  
plants to effect the equipment improvements and design changes described  
above.  
References  
!. Atomic Industrial Forum, "Licensing, Design and Construction Problems: Priorities  
for Solution" (Washington, D.C.. January 1978), p. 8.  
2. Gordon MacKerron, "Capital Costs of Light Water Reactors: The USA" (Science  
Policy Research Unit, University of Sussex, U.K., October 1979). p. 33 (emphasis added).  
3. Reference I, p. 8.  
4. R.R. Bennett and D.J. Kettler, "Dramatic Changes in the Costs of Nuclear and  
Fossil-Fueled Plants," Ebasco Services (New York, September 1978). p. 6.  
5. Reference I, Exhibits I and 9; and Reference 2, p. 28.  
6. Reference I, p. I.  
7. John H. Crowley, Manager of Advanced Engineering. United Engineers and Construc­tors, Inc., "Trends Influencing the Continuing Rise in Costs for Nuclear and Coal-Fired Electric  
Generating Stations," presented to the Washington State Senate Energy Committee, September  
I. For example. Carolina Power & Light (CP&Ll has reportedly upgraded radwaste  
systems and increased shielding to reduce occupational exposure at its Harris plant under  
construction, but exposure data suggest little backfitting at CP&L's existing reactors. Total  
worker exposure at its veteran ( 1971) Robinson 2 PWR was third highest among PWRs during  
1973-78 and has been rising. while exposure at CP&L's Brunswick BWRs ( 1975. 1977) has been  
no lower than the BWR average. 39  
116 Chapter4 1980, Figures 13 and 14. The estimates of labor and engineering hours therein from the  
"W ASH-1230" and "EEDB" reports correspond approximately to early and late seventies plant  
completions, respectively (telecom, 16 January 1981 ). Applying I 979 wage rates of about $13/hr  
and $25-30/hr. respectively (same telecom). the increased labor and engineering costs were  
approximately $90/kW and S60/kW, respectively. in 1979 dollars.  
8. Donald A. Brand, Vice President for General Construction, Pacific Gas & Electric  
Company, testimony before the California Public Utilities Commission, Application Numbers  
58911 and58912,6June 1979, p. 29.  
9, Christopher Bassett, "The High Cost of Nuclear Power Plants," Public Utilities  
Fortnightly, 27 April 1978.  
10. Reference 7, p. 22.  
I I. Reference 8, pp. 23-24.  
12. Reference I, p. 7.  
I 3. This definition was first presented by AEC Commissioner J .T. Ramey in an address to  
the November I 966 winter meeting of the American Nuclear Society in Pittsburgh. It is contained  
in all AEC/NRC regulations and American National Standards Institute standards related to QA.  
I 4. I 0 CFR 50. Appendix A, General Design Criterion No. I.  
15. Sidney A. Bernsen, Nuclear Safety, /6 (No.2), 127 (1975).  
16. ANSI Standards NIOI.2-1972, "Protective Coatings (Paints) for Light Water  
Nuclear Reactor Containment Facilities," and N 101.4-1972. "Quality Assurance for Protective  
Coatings Applied to Nuclear Facilities."  
17. 10 CFR 50, Appendix B. Section Ill, "Design ControL"  
18. Reference 15, p. 135.  
19. Reference 15, p. 133.  
20. Reference 15, p. 135,  
21. Reference8,pp. 17-18.  
22, See, for example, G.!,-. Bennett, Summary of NRC LWR Safety Research Programs  
on Fuel Behavior, Metallurgy/Materials and Operational Safety, NRC, NUREG-0581 ( 1979), p.  
44.  
23. M.D. Sulouff, "Equipment Qualification," WPPSS-0026-SA (June 1979).  
24. EPRI Journal, July/August 1980, p. 48.  
25. NUREG-0554, Single·Failure-Proof Cranes for Nuclear Power Plants (May 1979).  
replacing RG I. 104, "Overhead Crane Handling Systems for Nuclear Power Plants,'' issued for  
comment in February 1976.  
26. 10 CFR 50, Appendix A, General Design Criterion No.2.  
27, This description paraphrases Inside N.R.C .. 14 January 1980, p. 16.  
28. 10 CFR 100, Pan A.  
29. See Regulatory Guide L 120, "Fire Protection Guidelines for Nuclear Power  
Plants," p. I.  
30. An excellent brief account is David Corney's "The Incident at Browns Ferry" in Not  
Man Apart, 5 (No. 18) (mid-September, 1975). The major NRC post-mortem is NUREG-0050,  
Chapter4 117 Recommendations Related to Browns Ferry Fire (1976), See also Union of Concerned Scientists,  
Browns Ferry: The Regulatory Failure (1976).  
31. Federal Register, 45 (No. 225), 76602-76615 (19 November 1980). This contains  
Appendix R to 10 CFR 50, "Fire Protection Program for Nuclear Power Facilities Operating  
Prior to January I, 1979."  
32. The new criteria were published in 1973 as Appendix K to 10 CFR 50. They replaced  
interim ECCS rules issued in 1971.  
33. C. K. B. Lee and C.K, Chan, Steam Chugging in Pressure Suppression Containmettt,  
NUREG/CR-1562 (July 1980).  
34. See L GoozmanandC.M. Jan, Power Engineering. 83 (No. II). 64-67 (1979).  
35. 10 CFR 50, Appendix J, "Primary Reactor Containment Leakage Testing for Water­Cooled Power Reactors.·'  
36. Revision 2 ofRG 1.97 endorses, with exceptions, Draft 4 of ANS-4.5. "Functional  
Requirements for Accident Monitoring in a Nudear Power Generating Station,'' November  
1979.  
37. Robert 0. Pohl, "Radiation Exposure in LWRs Higher Than Expected," Nuclear  
Engineering International. 24 (No.2), 36-38 (1979). See also NUREG-0594, Occupational  
Radiation Exposure at Commercial Nuclear Power Reactors, /978 ( 1979).  
38. C. Komanoff, Power Plant Performance (Council on Economic Priorities, 1976), p.  
55.  
39. NUREG-0594 (Reference 37), Tables 4 through 6.  
Regulatory Guides And Industry Standards  
Section4.3  
RG !.89, "Qualification of Class IE Equipment for Nuclear Power Plants," November !974.  
IEEE Std 323, "Qualifying Class IE Equipment for Nuclear Power Generating Stations," 1971,  
revised 1974.  
IEEE Std 334, "Type Tests of Continuous Duty Class IE Motors for Nuclear Power Generating  
Stations," 1971, revised 1974.  
IEEE Std 381, "Type Tests of Class IE Modules Used in Nuclear Power Generating Stations," 1977.  
IEEE Std 382, "Type Test of Class 1 Electric Valve Operators for Nuclear Power Generating  
Stations," 1972.  
IEEE Std 383, "Class IE Electric Cables, Field Splices, and Connections for Nuclear Power  
Generating Stations," 1974.  
Section4.4  
RG 1.14, "Reactor Coolant Pump Flywheel Integrity," October 1971, revised August 1975.  
RG 1.46, "Protection Against Pipe Whip Inside Containment," May 1973.  
118 Chapter4 RG I. I 15, "Protection Against Low-Trajectory Turbine Missiles," March 1976, revised July 1977.  
ANSI N I 76, ''Design Basis for Protection of Nuclear Power Plants Against Effects of Postulated Pipe  
Rupture" (draft), June !974.  
ANSI N 177, "Plant Design Against Missiles" (draft), April 1974.  
Section 4.5  
RG I. 12, "Instrumentation for Earthquakes," March 1971, revised April 1974.  
RG 1.29, "Seismic Design Classification," June 1972, revised August 1973. February 1976, Septem­ber 1978.  
RG 1.48. "Design Limits and Loading Combinations for Seismic Category l Fluid System Com­ponents," May 1973.  
RG 1.57, "Design Limits and Loading Combinations for Metal Primary Reactor Containment System  
Components," June 1973.  
RG !.59, "Design Basis Floods for Nuclear Power Plants," August 1973, revised April 1976, August  
1977.  
RG I .60, "Design Response Spectra for Seismic Design of Nuclear Power Plants," October 1973,  
revised December 1973.  
RG 1.61, "Damping Values for Seismic Design of Nuclear Power Plants," October 1973.  
RG I. 76, "Design Basis Tornado for Nuclear Power Plants," April 1974.  
RG 1.92, "Combining Modal Responses and Spatial Components in Seismic Response Analysis,"  
December 1974, revised February 1976.  
RG 1.100, "Seismic Qualification of Electric Equipment for Nuclear Power Plants," March 1976.  
revised August 1977.  
RG I. 102, "Flood Protection for Nuclear Power Plants," October 1975, revised September 1976.  
RG J.J 17, "Tornado Design Classification," June 1976, revised March 1978.  
RG I .122, "Development of Floor Design Response Spectra for Seismic Design of Floor-Supported  
Equipment or Components," September 1976, revised February 1978.  
RG 1.124, "Service Limits and Loading Combinations for Class I Linear-Type Component Sup­ports," November 1976, revised January 1978.  
RG l. 130, "Service Limits and Loading Combinations for Class I Plate-and-Shell-Type Component  
Supports," July !977, revised October 1978.  
IEEE Std 344, "Seismic Qualification of Class IE Equipment for Nuclear Power Generating Sta­tions," !971, revised 1975.  
Section 4.6  
RG !.75, "Physical Independence of Electric Systems," February 1974, revised January 1975,  
September 1978.  
RG !. 120, "Fire Protection Guidelines for Nuclear Power Plants," June 1976, revised November  
1977.  
Standard Review Plan, Branch Technical Position APSCB 9.5- I, "Fire Protection for Nuclear Power  
Plants," and Appendix A.  
Chapter4 119 Section 4.7  
RG 1.20, "Comprehensive Vibration Assessment Program for Reactor Internals During Preopera­tional and Initial Startup Testing," December 1971, revised June 1975, May 1976.  
RG 1.26, "Quality Group Classifications and Standards for Water-, Steam-, and Radioactive-Waste­Containing Components of Nuclear Power Plants," March 1972, revised December 1974, June 1975,  
February 197 6.  
RG 1.27, "Ultimate Heat Sink for Nuclear Power Plants," March 1972, revised March 1974, January  
1976.  
RG 1.31, "Control of Ferrite Content in Stainless Steel Weld Metal," August 1972, revised June  
1973, May 1977, Aprill978.  
RG 1.43, ''Control of Stainless Steel Weld Cladding of Low-Alloy Steel Components,'' May 1973.  
RG 1.44, "Control of the Use of Sensitized Stainless Steel," May 1973.  
RG I .45, ''Reactor Coolant Pressure Boundary Leakage Detection Systems,'' May 1973.  
RG 1.50, "Control of Preheat Temperature for Welding of Low-Alloy Steel," May 1973.  
RG 1.56, "Maintenance of Water Purity in Boiling Water Reactors," June 1973, revised July 1978.  
RG 1.65, ''Materials and Inspections for Reactor Vessel Closure Studs,'' October 1973.  
RG I .67, ''Installation of Overpressure Protection Devices,'' October 1973.  
RG 1.79, "Preoperational Testing of Emergency Core Cooling Systems for Pressurized Water  
Reactors," June 1974, revised September 1975.  
RG 1.82, ''Sumps for Emergency Core Cooling and Containment Spray Systems," June 1974.  
RG I .83, ''lnservice Inspection of Pressurized Water Reactor Stearn Generator Tubes,'' June 1974,  
revised July 1975.  
RG I. 96, "Design of Main Stearn Isolation Valve Leakage Control Systems for Boiling Water Reactor  
Nuclear Power Plants," May 1975, revised January 1977.  
RG 1.133, "Loose-Part Detection Program for the Primary System ofLight-Water-Cooled Reactors,"  
September 1977.  
RG I. 139, "Guidance for Residual Heat Removal," May 1978.  
Section 4.8  
RG I. 7, ''Control of Combustible Gas Concentrations in Containment Following a Loss-of-Coolant  
Accident," March 1971, revised September 1976, November 1978.  
RG 1.10, "Mechanical (Cadweld) Splices in Reinforcing Bars of Category I Concrete Structures,"  
March 1971, revised January 1973.  
RG I. II, "Instrument Lines Penetrating Primary Reactor Containment," March 1971, revised  
February 1972.  
RG I. 15, "Testing of Reinforcing Bars for Category I Concrete Structures," October 1971, revised  
December 1972.  
RG I. 18, ''Structural Acceptance Test for Concrete Primary Reactor Containments,'' October 1971,  
revised August 1972.  
RG 1.19, "Nondestructive Examination of Primary Containment Liner Welds," December 1971,  
revised August 1972.  
120 Chapter4 RG 1.35, "lnservice Inspection of Ungrouted Tendons in Prestressed Concrete Containment Struc­tures," February 1973, revised June 1974, January 1976.  
RG 1.52, "Design, Testing, and Maintenance Criteria for Post Accident Engineered-Safety-Feature  
Atmosphere Cleanup System Air Filtration and Absorption Units of Light-Water-Cooled Nuclear  
Power Plants," June 1973, July 1976, March 1978.  
RG 1.55, "Concrete Placement in Category I Structures," June 1973.  
RG 1.57, ''Design Limits and Loading Combinations for Metal Primary Reactor Containment System  
Components," June 1973.  
RG 1.63, "Electric Penetration Assemblies in Containment Structures for Light-Water-Cooled  
Nuclear Power Plants," October 1973, revised May 1977, July 1978.  
RG 1.82, "Sumps for Emergency Core Cooling and Containment Spray Systems," June 1974.  
RG 1.94, "Quality Assurance Requirements for Installation, Inspection, and Testing of Structural  
Concrete and Structural Steel During the Construction Phase of Nuclear Power Plants," April 1975,  
revised April 1976.  
RG I. 136, "Material for Concrete Containments," November I 977, revised October 1978.  
RG 1.143, "Design Guidance for Radioactive Waste Management Systems, Structures, and Com­ponents Installed in Light-Water-Cooled Nuclear Power Plants,'' July I 978.  
ANSI N45.2.5, "Supplementary Quality Assurance Requirements for Installation. Inspection, and  
Testing of Structural Concrete and Structural Steel During the Construction Phase of Nuclear Power  
Plants," 1974.  
ANSI N271/ANS-56.2, "Containment Isolation Provisions for Fluid Systems," 1976.  
IEEE Std 317, "Electric Penetration Assemblies in Containment Structures for Nuclear Power  
Generating Stations," 1971, revised 1972, 1976.  
Section 4.9  
RG 1.6, "Independence Between Redundant Standby (Onsite) Power Sources and Between Their  
Distribution Systems," March 1971.  
RG 1.9, "Selection, Design, and Qualification of Diesel-Generator Units Used as Onsite Electric  
Power Systems at Nuclear Power Plants," March 1971, revised November 1978.  
RG 1.22, "Periodic Testing of Protection System Actuation Functions," February 1972.  
RG 1.32, "Criteria for Safety-Related Electric Power Systems for Nuclear Power Plants," August  
1972. revised June 1973, May 1977, April 1978.  
RG 1.41, "Preoperational Testing of Redundant On-Site Electric Power Systems to Verify Proper  
Load Group Assignments," March 1973.  
RG 1.47, "Bypassed and Inoperable Status Indication for Nuclear Power Plant Safety Systems," May  
1973.  
RG 1.75, "Physical Independence of Electric Systems," February 1974, revised January 1975,  
September 1978.  
RG 1.78, "Assumptions for Evaluating the Habitability of a Nuclear Power Plant Control Room  
During a Postulated Hazardous Chemical Release," June 1974.  
RG 1.81, "Shared Emergency and Shutdown Electric Systems for Multi-Unit Nuclear Power Plants,"  
June 1974, revised January 1975.  
Chapter4 121 RG 1. 95, "Protection of Nuclear Power Plant Control Room Operators Against an Accidental Chlorine  
Release," February 1975. revised January 1977.  
RG 1.97, "Instrumentation for Light-Water-Cooled Nuclear Power Plants to Assess Plant Conditions  
During and Following an Accident," December 1975, revised August 1977.  
RG I. 118, "Periodic Testing of Electric Power and Protection Systems," June 1976, revised Novem­ber 1977 and June 1978.  
RG 1.128, "Installation-Design and Installation of Large Lead Storage Batteries for Nuclear Power  
Plants," April1977, revised February 1978.  
IEEE Std 279, "Protection Systems for Nuclear Power Generating Stations," 1968, revised 1971.  
IEEE Std 308, "Class IE Power Systems for Nuclear Power Generating Stations," 1970. revised  
1971, 1974. 1978.  
IEEE Std 338, "Periodic Testing of Nuclear Power Generating Station Class IE Power and Protection  
Systems," 197l,revised 1975,1977.  
IEEE Std 384, "Independence of Class IE Equipment and Criteria," 1974. revised 1977.  
IEEE Std 387, "Diesel-Generator Units Applied as Standby Power Supplies for Nuclear Power  
Generating Stations," 1972, revised 1977.  
IEEE Std 484. "Installation·Design and Installation of Large Lead Storage Batteries for Generating  
Stations and Substations," 1975.  
Section 4.10  
RG 1.21, "Measuring, Evaluating, and Reporting Radioactivity in Solid Wastes and Releases of  
Radioactive Materials in Liquid and Gaseous Effluents from Light-Water-Cooled Nuclear Power  
Plants," December 1971, revised June 1974.  
RG I. 112, • 'Calculation of Releases of Radioactive Materials in Gaseous and Liquid Effluents from  
Light-Water-Cooled Power Reactors." April 1976, revised May 1977.  
RG 1.140, "Design, Testing, and Maintenance Criteria for Normal Ventilation Exhaust System Air  
Filtration and Adsorption Units of Light-Water-Cooled Nuclear Power Plants," March !978.  
RG 1.143, "Design Guidance for Radioactive Waste Management Systems, Structures, and Com­ponents Installed in Light-Water-Cooled Nuclear Power Plants," July 1978.  
RG 8.8, "Information Relevant to Ensuring that Occupational Radiation Exposures at Nuclear Power  
Stations Will Be As Low As Is Reasonably Achievable," July 1973, revised September 1975, March  
1977, June 1978.  
122 Chapter4 5  
Future Nuclear  
Regulatory  
Requirements  
Regulatory standards for nuclear power plants have grown increasingly  
stringent as a result of efforts to reduce the accident hazards per plant and to  
address new safety problems surfacing in operating experience and licensing  
reviews. These efforts have received considerable impetus from the expansion  
of the nuclear generating sector, as Chapter 3 demonstrates.  
New nuclear plants are also subject to these efforts. They will be affected  
by more stringent design and construction requirements arising from new  
operating experience and from further pressure to reduce accident probabilities  
as the population of reactors increases. They will also be affected by require­ments already promulgated or now being formulated that grew out of previous  
sector expansion but were not applied to completed plants due to "regulatory  
lag." In addition, design and construction of new plants will be greatly  
affected by the thorough re-appraisal of nuclear regulation arising from the  
Three Mile Island (TMI) accident. These increased requirements will cause the  
costs of plants now being licensed or built to significantly exceed the costs, in  
real terms, of reactors completed in the 1970s.  
This chapter describes some of the new regulatory issues that will give  
rise to higher capital costs. The requirements that will add to future plant costs  
will be generated through the following processes:  
1. implementation of requirements previously promulgated but  
not applied to completed plants;  
2. new regulatory guides and revisions to current guides under  
development;  
3. resolution of the "unresolved safety issues" identified by the  
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) and the Advisory  
Committee on Reactor Safeguards (ACRS);  
4. resolution of other safety issues already identified in operating  
experience and licensing reviews;  
Chapter 5 123 5. new safety problems that will be identified through future  
operating experience and licensing reviews of new reactors;  
6. correction of deficiencies revealed in the TMI accident.  
Cost estimates are available for only a few of the anticipated new  
standards, and these estimates should not be viewed as firm since in the past it  
has proven extremely difficult to gauge the impacts of changes in nuclear  
design requirements. The standards appear to be vast in scope, and they are  
likely to have a major effect on costs, however. Even without the requirements  
stemming from TMI, implementation of recent standards and prospective new  
ones could easily cause the 55% real (inflation-adjusted) cost increase for  
1978-88 projected from past cost relationships in Chapter 10."  
The effects of the TMI accident on nuclear standards are discussed in the  
next chapter. This chapter addresses the first five items listed above.  
Section 5.1: Existing Requirements Subject To  
Regulatory Lag  
New regulatory standards do not necessarily apply to operating reactors  
or those under construction. Although Chairman John Kemeny of the Presi­dent's Commission on the Accident at TMI (the Kemeny Commission) con­sidered it "shocking" that the plant was exempted from a 1975 rule requiring  
that reactors have redundant systems to seal off the containment building, 1  
reactor. regulations and standards are frequently "grandfathered." Only some  
new standards are imposed upon plants under construction (which industry  
refers to as ratcheting, as distinguished from backfitting, which pertains to  
changes in operating plants); many exempt plants being built and apply only to  
plants awaiting construction permits. In other cases, standards are applied on a  
case-by-case basis and pertain to some, but not all, plants under construction or  
in operation.  
Because of the long time required to construct nuclear plants, many  
existing regulatory standards did not affect recently-completed reactors. Ac­cordingly, the cost of a typical 1978 plant-$887/kilowatt (kW) in 1979  
"steam-plant" dollars, as calculated in Chapter 10-does not reflect some  
requirements that have already been promulgated and will affect many plants  
a. The statistical analysis in Chapters 8 and 10 of the costs of reactors completed during  
1971-78 indicates that a 142% real increase in average reactor capital costs occurred together with  
the expansion of the nuclear sector from 10 GW to 55 GW during 1971-78. If past cost  
relationships continue and if installed nuclear capacity reaches 150 GW-the sum total of  
reactors currently operating and those licensed for construction-then the last gigawatt of  
capacity would cost 55% more to·construct in real terms than a typical 1978 gigawatt. This  
projection does not reflect special cost impacts from Three Mile Island.  
124 ChapterS under construction. This section summarizes the major existing requirements  
that were not applied to recent plants. They are grouped according to the  
categories employed in reviewing 1970s regulatory standards in Chapter4Y  
Quality Assurance: Quality assurance (QA) requirements pertaining to  
the design, fabrication, installation, and testing of "safety-related" equip­ment in nuclear plants increased significantly in the 1970s and had a major  
effect on equipment costs and construction logistics, as Section 4.2 demon­strates. Their effect is virtually certain to be still greater for new plants, for  
several reasons.  
First, QA standards, which for the most part are formulated by industrial  
engineering societies and "endorsed" in NRC regulatory guides, generally  
have not been applied to previously purchased equipment or to completed  
construction work. Some standards have been applied only to new construction  
starts. Regardless of whether this practice continues, new plants will be  
affected increasingly by existing QA standards which, due to regulatory lag,  
had little or no impact on even the most recently-completed plants in the data  
sample.  
Second, NRC is likely to sharpen its efforts to gain compliance with QA  
requirements by licensees, their contractors, and their suppliers. Recent dis­coveries of major deficiencies in reactor design and construction practices,  
together with the TMI accident, have provoked widespread criticism of NRC's  
enforcement program and appear to have stimulated some changes already.  
Many of these deficiencies concern seismic design and construction  
practices in operating plants. In March 1979, errors were discovered in an  
architect-engineering firm's calculations of potential earthquake stresses on  
coolant piping in five reactors. Recently, a dozen other plants were also found  
to contain piping systems and structures whose actual, "as-built" conditions  
differed from seismic design specifications. 2 The fact that these design and  
installation deficiencies occurred at many reactors and were not identified  
during construction indicates serious gaps in both constructors' QA programs  
and NRC's construction monitoring.  
Other instances of inadequate implementation of QA programs have, by  
NRC's own admission, "appear[edJ in every facet of project activity" 3 at  
some sites. These have included: incorrect material specifications in procure­ment documents; erroneous predictions of the response of instrument systems  
to postulated accidents; acceptance of defective structural steel construction;  
failure to check vendor designs; and certification of inspection work without  
observation by inspectors. 4 At a number of nuclear projects, moreover, QA  
requirements have apparently been bypassed in major areas of construction­b. The discussion is subject to the caveat that actual dates on which some requirements  
took effect could not be determined; many NRC regulatory guides, for example, affected design  
and construction practice through NRC licensing reviews before they were issued as guides.  
ChapterS 125 leading, for example, to large voids in concrete walls at one site-and designs  
have been modified by unqualified field personnel (see Section 3.7). These  
deficiencies appear to corroborate the findings by the General Accounting  
Office that NRC inspectors "do little independent testing of construction  
work, ... rely heavily upon the utility company self-evaluation, spend little  
time observing ongoing construction work, and do not communicate routinely  
with people who do the actual construction work. " 5  
These revelations have begun to affect NRC's QA enforcement program.  
Since 1979, NRC has taken the unprecedented step of suspending large sec­tions of safety-related construction work at several plants, including Wolf  
Creek, Midland, and South Texas, for up to a year until the contractor  
developed an adequate QA program. The most stringent NRC enforcement  
action, a ban on all safety-related work at Marble Hill, imposed in August  
1979, was still partially in effect in early 1981. NRC has also levied fines of up  
to $100,000 for noncompliance with construction QA requirements-actions  
whose public impact on utilities far exceeds their direct costs. And NRC has  
recently notified all licensees that it "is becoming increasingly concerned by  
continuing evidence that many [licensees] are not properly implementing their  
[contractor] QA programs" and has called for greater compliance. 6  
NRC is also making several institutional changes aimed at reducing its  
reliance on the industry's self-policing of construction QA. It has begun  
assigning resident inspectors to all construction sites (previously they exam­ined only facilities nearing completion) and is directing them to observe more  
work activities and to verify that as-built construction satisfies design re­quirements. 7 It is developing an information system, based on reported opera­tional and construction defects, to enable it to more efficiently monitor the  
estimated 3,000 vendors of nuclear equipment and services, 8 and it is re­portedly considering stationing resident inspectors at the offices of reactor  
suppliers and architect-engineers. 9 These reforms may improve operational  
safety and reliability, but they will also certainly increase the fabrication,  
engineering, and installation costs associated with QA.  
Other prospective changes in QA programs and the expansion of the  
classification of equipment deemed safety-related, and thus subject to QA, are  
discussed in Section 6.3.  
Equipment Qualification: Equipment qualification refers to testing and  
documentation to demonstrate that a manufactured component has been de­signed, fabricated, and installed so that it can function despite extremes of  
heat, humidity, radiation, and other stresses that could result from postulated  
accidents or are present in normal operation. Like quality assurance require­ments, procedures for equipment qualification became more stringent in the  
1970s and added greatly to reactor costs. And similarly, both regulatory lag  
and discoveries of widespread deficiencies in qualification programs will  
126 Chapter 5 ensure that new reactors will bear increased costs for qualification testing and  
documentation.  
Regulatory lag arises from the exemption of most purchased components  
from subsequent qualification requirements. For example, the 1974 edition of  
IEEE Standard (Std) 323, 10 which governs qualification of safety-related  
electrical equipment, surpassed the 1971 edition by adding component aging  
as a deterioration factor to be tested, and by expanding test documentation  
requirements and equipment tolerance margins. Because the NRC permitted  
grandfathering for most equipment, no plant operating as of mid-1980 will be  
fully qualified to the level of the 1974 standards, however.'' Indeed, the first  
reactor to receive full power authorization following the TMI accident was  
qualified for operation under accident conditions in only 35 of 92 categories of  
vital electrical equipment.< Similarly, the "daughter standards'' which apply  
IEEE Std 323 to specific electrical component classes such as motors and  
cables also were issued or revised during the mid-1970s and do not affect all  
equipment in recent plants.  
Second, NRC investigations initiated in 1977 and continuing today have  
turned up serious lapses in many licensees' equipment qualification proce­dures. In examining the licensees' qualification programs, NRC found "seri­ous problems" such as test sequences omitting important service conditions,  
no consideration of aging degradation, test models differing from installed  
components, and incomplete test documentation. 13 In examining actual equip­ment, NRC found that few components met applicable guidelines. 14 In con­cluding that "the nuclear industry is not devoting the resources necessary to  
solving the [equipment] qualification problem," 15 the Commission further  
implied that existing plants have generally escaped some costs that would be  
incurred in complying with current requirements.  
NRC's program for upgrading equipment qualification 16 essentially in­volves requiring most plants commencing commercial operation after 1982 to  
meet all of the provisions of the 1974 edition of IEEE Std 323. Exemptions  
from some requirements are permitted for plants currently operating or close to  
completion, but in the important area of aging, susceptible materials will be  
subject to periodic replacement and aging effects will be considered in NRC  
decisions on safety adequacy. 17 Earlier plants will also be required to conform  
with many parts of the 1974 edition of Std 323 by mid- I 982. In assessing the  
effects of caustic sprays, for example, safety-related electrical equipment  
within containment at all plants must be proven capable of withstanding not  
only the chemicals used in the containment spray system, but also the most  
severe caustic spray environment that could result from a single failure in the  
spray system. 18  
c. The unit, North Anna 2, is deficient in equipment in only nine categories, with  
inadequate documentation of confof!Tiing equipment in 48 categories, according to the licensee,  
Virginia Electric & Power Co."  
Chapter 5 127 The application of current IEEE standards will clearly add to capital  
costs of plants under construction (as well as requiring considerable expendi­tures for operating plants). Moreover, NRC's upgrading programs "do not  
address in detail all areas of qualification, since certain areas are not yet well  
understood.'' 19 Issues such as aging effects, synergistic effects, and effects of  
combustible gases on equipment with organic materials are presently being  
researched and may lead to changes in NRC qualification requirements. 20  
Internally-Induced Accidents: Recently-completed plants employ con­siderable pipe restraints, shielding, and physical separation to protect sensitive  
equipment from the effects of pipe ruptures and high-speed fragments ejected  
from rotating machinery ("missiles"). These additions were a major source of  
reactor cost increases during the I 970s. Although the failure of the Yankee­Rowe plant's turbine in 1980 accentuates the turbine missile concern, it is  
unlikely that either pipe ruptures or missiles will occasion significant cost  
increases. The other system included in this category, single-failure-proof  
reactor cranes, was only partially upgraded at recent plants, but the system is  
not especially expensive and its further improvement should not impose a large  
economic burden on new plants.  
Seismic and Other Natural Phenomena: Most seismic design require­ments have been applied, as practical, to plants under construction, contribut­ing significantly to nuclear cost increases in the 1970s. There are exceptions,  
however. Regulatory Guides (RG) I. 92 and I. 122, which make more severe  
estimates of earthquakes' effects on structures, apply primarily to plants whose  
construction started after December 1974 and September 1976, respectively.  
(See Section 4.5 for names and descriptions of seismic regulatory guides.)  
Two guides which require more sturdy component supports for safety-related  
equipment, RG I. 124 and 1.130, similarly apply only to construction starts  
after November 1976 and July 1977. RG I. 117, which itemizes structural  
design features to withstand tornadoes, applies fully only to plants which  
received construction permits after mid-1976. Application of these require­ments will cause most future plants to employ stronger structural members and  
pipe supports than did recently-completed plants.  
Similarly, the 1975 revision of IEEE Std 344, which upgraded the  
qualification requirements in the !971 edition for ensuring adequacy of seismic  
design of safety-related electrical equipment, will have a greater effect on new  
plants. Plants now being built will also be less likely to avoid some seismic­related costs through construction deviations or erroneous pipe stress calcula­tions, as did a number of plants in the data sample (discussed above). In  
addition, future reactors might require "seismic scram" systems that would  
automatically shut down the reactor when triggered by earth .tremors; these  
systems are in place at Diab1o Canyon and DOE's plutonium production  
128 ChapterS reactors at Hanford and Savannah River and are planned for new plants in  
Japan. 21  
Other new seismic considerations may offset some of these pressures.  
Some test data indicate that seismic design practices may be excessively  
conservative in calculating resistance of plant structures to earthquake motion,  
for example. 22 Such conclusions are for the most part preliminary and subject  
to conflicting interpretations, 23 however, so that any easing of seismic require­ments is speculative. Nevertheless, slowing the rate of change of seismic  
standards could reduce the number of costly design and equipment changes  
required during construction.  
Fire Protection: All generations of reactors have had to upgrade equip­ment and designs to improve fire protection after the 1975 Browns Ferry fire.  
As discussed in Section 4.6, all plants have added fire detection and suppres­sion systems, including portable emergency lighting and communications.  
There are major generational differences, however, in methods used to prevent  
fires from propagating, especially among safety-related electric cables (which  
burned severely at Browns Ferry). Plants currently in early construction must  
provide two cable-spreading rooms to separate cables in redundant equipment  
"trains." Cable trays (conduits) must be metallic and equipped with heat  
detectors, cable routings must have frequent "fire stops" and fireproof pene­trations, and the cable materials and insulation must meet IEEE flame­resistance criteria. 24  
Operating plants and those in middle or late construction have not been  
required to make these provisions if they employ fire-retardant coatings and  
materials. Some of the plants, however, are conforming with these cable  
design criteria, perhaps to avoid possible backfitting later on.  
Newer plants are also required to use greater distances and additional fire  
barriers to separate safety-related equipment items from their redundant  
counterparts and from fire hazards in non-safety-related (and thus less well­protected) areas. Their ventilation and drain systems must be capable of  
removing and sampling combustion-related heat, smoke, and water without  
permitting fires to spread. Noncombustible materials must be employed for  
many walls and structures. Again, some of these measures are being taken at  
plants under construction that are exempt from compliance.  
Fire protection issues, methods, and regulations are complex and some­what plant-specific, making generalization difficult. Nevertheless, there is a  
broad continuum away from reliance on fire-retardant coatings and toward  
greater physical separation and other design features, and improved cable  
insulation, as plants enter construction. Although recently-completed plants  
did have to make considerable and costly adjustments during construction, the  
more comprehensive fire protection measures being built into new plants  
appear likely to impose even higher.costs.  
Chapter 5 129 Additional fire protection requirements for operating plants recently  
promulgated by NRC are discussed in Section 4.6.  
Reactor Core and Core Cooling Systems: Most of the regulatory stan­dards in this area described in Section 4. 7 have been applied to recently­completed plants as well as to plants still in construction. Exceptions are  
several I 973 regulatory guides requiring improved welding and fabrication for  
steel used in critical' 'Class I and 2'' fluid systems. These affected most but not  
all pressure-retaining and Emergency Core Cooling System (ECCS) piping,  
vessels, and pumps at recently completed plants. Similarly, RG 1.139, requir­ing redundancy, quality assurance, and improved controls for residual heat  
removal equipment, and RG 1.133, mandating an automatic system to detect  
loose primary coolant system parts, were only partially applied to recent  
plants.  
Containment Structures and Systems: Many but not all of the improve­ments in containment structures and systems developed during the 1970s were  
employed by the later plants in the capital cost data base. Important exceptions  
are design changes in new BWRs to accommodate vibratory pressures on  
containment structures in the event of a loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA).  
These will require thicker walls, greater steel placement, and stronger equip­ment supports.  
Similarly, some recent plants were not required to apply the improved  
concrete placement practices in RG 1.55 (issued in 1973), or the more strin­gent quality assurance procedures for installing concrete and structural steel in  
foundations, form work, and steel reinforcement in RG I. 94 ( 1975, endorsing  
a 1974 American National Standards Institute [ANSI] standard). RG 1.141,  
concerning isolation valves for piping systems penetrating containment ( 1978,  
endorsing a 1976 ANSI standard)-the standard grandfathered at TMI and  
referred to by Professor Kemeny-did not apply to most recent plants. And  
most electrical penetration assemblies through containment walls in recent  
plants were constructed according to the I 972 edition of IEEE Std 317, rather  
than to the design, material, and qualification criteria in the 1976 edition.  
Changes in containment systems and design features to control hydrogen  
generation and to cope with degraded-core and core-melt accidents are dis­cussed in Section 6.2.  
Electric Power, Instrumentation, and Control: Expanded require­ments for these systems contributed greatly to nuclear capital cost increases in  
the 1970s. Not only were qualification procedures made more stringent for  
safety-related electrical and control equipment (Section 4.3), but redundancy  
and independence criteria were upgraded and equipment performance require­ments were expanded (Section 4.9).  
Many improvements dictated by NRC regulatory guides and IEEE stan­130 Chapter 5 dards applied only to plants beginning construction after the time of promulga­tion, however, and therefore are not reflected in the costs of the data base  
plants. Increasing qualification requirements were discussed above. In addi­tion, new plants will have to provide more redundant back-up for electrical  
equipment and instrumentation. Prime examples are the back-up circuits for  
connecting the electrical system to the transmission grid specified in the 1978  
edition of IEEE Std 308 and the prohibition in RG 1.81 against employing a  
"swing diesel" generator as a single back-up power supply for new multi-unit  
stations. Moreover, IEEE Std 384, issued in 1974 and revised in 1977, will  
require physical separation via distances or enclosed cabinets for much safety­related equipment already subject to redundancy criteria, such as instruments,  
electric cables, electrical penetrations through containment, and auxiliary  
systems essential to the operation of safety-related instruments and power  
systems.  
Furthermore, some recent standards which expand performance criteria  
for instrumentation and control equipment will affect future plants more than  
recently-completed ones. These include the provision of a separate emergency  
shutdown room in the auxiliary building, and equipment to isolate the control  
room and maintain it in a habitable state during fires, chemical spills, or other  
accidents. Most importantly, RG 1.97, which specifies instrumentation to  
monitor plant conditions during and after accidents, is being significantly  
upgraded from its initial 1975 edition and 1977 revision. Those editions for the  
most part exempted plants in operation or under construction, and permitted  
the licensee to determine the instrumentation to be installed. In contrast, a  
second revision being drafted itemizes hundreds of required instruments and  
their measurement ranges. (This revision is discussed in the next chapter with  
other post-TMI regulatory changes.)  
Conversely, technological advances should permit some cost reduction  
in power, instrumentation, and control equipment at future plants. Instrumen­tation systems are increasingly employing solid-state electronics, and digital  
computers are supplanting analog-based logic systems. These innovations are  
cheap, compact, and low in power usage compared to current equipment.  
Moreover, remote multiplexing and prefabricated cabling may reduce electri­cal circuitry equipment and installation costs.  
Cost reductions from new technology are likely to be far offset, however,  
by the increased requirements for power supply, electrical circuitry, and  
instrumentation described above. In addition, operating experience continues  
to provoke consideration of further improvements. One example, the recent  
serious malfunctions in power supply systems for non-nuclear instruments at  
several Babcock & Wilcox (B&W) reactors, is discussed in detail in Section  
5.4.  
Radiation Control Systems: Equipment to reduce offsite radiation re­leases during normal plant operation and following accidents was significantly  
Chapter 5 131 upgraded during the 1970s at all plants under construction (and at most  
operating plants). Hence, their effects have been fully felt in the later plants in  
the data base.  
In contrast, few design measures to reduce worker exposure to radiation  
were made at completed plants. Some steps are being taken at plants under  
construction: remote systems for handling radwaste equipment, shielded cubi­cles and portable-shielding access in high-radiation areas, ventilation upgrad­ings, and overall equipment design and material selection to reduce radiation  
fields and repair times. These may reduce downtime and maintenance burdens  
but will add to capital costs. Exposure reductions may be necessary, moreover,  
simply to keep up with prospective decreases in permissible exposure limits  
(see discussion in next section).  
Improvements in waste solidification systems also may be required.  
Most systems in use leave small amounts of free-standing, corrosive liquids,  
but states with low-level waste repositories are pressuring NRC to require that  
wastes shipped to repositories be completely solidified. Cement systems that  
might be necessary could reportedly add up to $20/kW to plant costs. 25  
Section 5.2: New And Revised Regulatory Guides  
The previous section described regulatory standards that are already in  
place but which did not affect the design and cost of recently-completed plants,  
because of regulatory lag. New nuclear plants will bear increased costs not  
only from those, but from revisions of existing regulatory guides and formula­tion of new ones as well.  
Through the end of 1978, NRC had issued 143 "Division I" (Power  
Reactor) regulatory guides. These guides spanned virtually every facet of  
reactor design and construction, and encompassed many, if not most, of the  
increased regulatory standards that contributed to more than doubling real  
nuclear capital costs from 1971 to 1978.  
Twenty-six of these guides were under revision as of March 1979, just  
prior to the TMI accident. 26 Among them are guides pertaining to seismic  
instrumentation, reactor coolant pump flywheels, protection against pipe  
whip, QA requirements, low-alloy steel welding, qualification of safety-related  
electrical equipment, loose-part detection systems, residual heat removal  
systems, radionuclide filtration and adsorption, containment isolation for  
piping, and safety-related concrete structures. Not all pending guide revisions  
portend sweeping changes, but the large number being revised-almost one­fifth of the total-is further indication of instability in nuclear regulatory  
standards.  
Another particularly important regulatory guide in revision is RG 8. 8,  
Occupational Radiation Exposures. Previous revisions expressed NRC's in­tent to make exposures "as low as reasonably achievable" in both operation  
132 ChapterS and decommissioning activities. Current consideration of exposure reduction  
centers around workers who may require special protection from radiation,  
such as women of childbearing age. 27 Any reduction in permissible doses  
would disproportionately affect maintenance work efficiency, since a larger  
portion of workers' allowable exposure would be consumed unproductively in  
setting up and transit. Further design steps to control exposures, such as  
greater equipment separation, larger work spaces, and remote servicing,  
would increase capital costs. Design features to reduce decommissioning costs  
and exposures, ranging from extra space around components for easier dis­mantling to expanded record-keeping with as-built drawings and maintenance  
histories, could similarly add to costs.  
In addition to regulatory guide revisions, NRC is developing 25 new  
Division 1 guides. 28 While it is not possible here to analyze the potential  
import of each guide, many appear capable of significantly altering design and  
construction practices and adding to costs. Among the subject areas they  
address are:  
• containment spray system design;  
• foundation and earthwork construction criteria;  
• soil liquefaction potential at construction sites;  
• ultrasonic testing of reactor vessel welds and Class I and 2  
austenitic piping systems;  
• analysis, design, construction, and testing of concrete contain­ment structures;  
• electric instrumentation and control system portions of protec­tion systems, protective action systems, and auxiliary support­ing features;  
• single-failure criteria for fluid systems;  
• qualification and production tests for piping and equipment  
snubbers;  
• qualification tests for cable penetration fire stops;  
• qualification of electric modules;  
• safety-related permanent dewatering systems;  
• earthquake instrumentation data recording and processing;  
• tornado-driven missiles; and  
• extreme wind speeds for coastal sites.  
Gross numerical comparisons are somewhat speculative, but if the new reg­ulatory guides have the same proportional effect on costs as the 143 existing  
guides, their impact would be substantial. Indeed, past cost increases do not  
fully reflect all existing guides, due to regulatory lag, so that the effect on costs  
"per guide" was probably greater than their numbers suggest.  
ChapterS 133 Section 5.3: Unresolved Safety Issues  
Reactor operating experience, licensing reviews, and safety research  
have brought to light a number of potential design deficiencies common to all  
reactors or to a particular reactor type. Discovery of such deficiencies has  
prompted many of the new regulatory standards discussed above and in Chap­ter 4. Many potential deficiencies have not yet been addressed by regulatory  
action, however. Although they particularly affect existing plants, efforts to  
resolve them will amost certainly impose large new costs upon plants under  
construction and will cause considerable, persistent uncertainty in plant design  
requirements.  
As of September 1980, NRC listed 14 Unresolved Safety Issues (US!s)  
pursuant to the following definition:  
An Unresolved Safety Issue is a matter affecting a number of nuclear  
power plants that poses important questions concerning the adequacy of  
existing safety requirements for which a final resolution has not yet been  
developed and that involves conditions not likely to be acceptable over the  
lifetime of the plants affected. 29  
NRC staff has nominated seven additional candidate issues for Commission  
designation as unresolved safety issues. Moreover, the Advisory Committee  
on Reactor Safeguards (ACRS), a body of senior nuclear safety specialists  
attached to NRC, has compiled 17 other "generic items felating to light-water  
reactors" which are not in the NRC list of US Is but nevertheless could  
significantly affect reactor design criteria. Finally, although some issues in  
previous NRC and ACRS lists have been declared resolved, past experience  
indicates that genuine resolution and implementation will prove elusive and  
that some "resolved" issues will require further regulatory consideration.  
NRC List of Unresolved Safety Issues: In December 1977, Congress  
amended the 1974 Energy Reorganization Act to require NRC to submit a plan  
to identify unresolved reactor safety issues. The first list, in early 1978, had  
133 issues, of which 41 were "Category A," with the remainder designated  
lower priority. 30 The list was reduced a year later, and I 7 issues were selected  
as having the greatest safety significance (see box). Some issues apply primar­ily to existing plants; for example, Reactor Vessel Materials Toughness con­cerns possible weakening of pressure vessel weld seams in older reactors by  
long-term irradiation, due to the welds' high copper content (since reduced).  
Many US Is pertain to both new and existing plants, however. A case in point is  
Systems Interactions.  
Systems interactions are events in which different plant systems interact  
with each other in such a way that the performance of safety systems may be  
degraded. They are hard to foresee ''because the design and analysis of plant  
134 ChapterS NRC Unresolved Safety Issues  
(January 1979 list31 )  
(Italicized issues are discussed in text. See  
References 29 or 3 I for complete description of each issue.)  
1. Water Hammer  
2. Asymmetric Blowdown Loads on the Reactor Coolant System  
3. PWR Steam Generator Tube Integrity  
4. BWR Mark I and ll Pressure Suppression Containments  
5. Anticipated Transients Without Scram (A TWS)  
6. BWR Nozzle Cracking  
7. Reactor Vessel Materials Toughness  
8. Fracture Toughness of Steam Generator and Reactor Cool­ant Pump Supports**  
9. Systems Interactions  
10. Environmental Qualification of Safety-Related Electrical  
Equipment  
I J. Reactor Vessel Pressure Transient Protection*  
12. Residual Heat Rem'Jval Requirements**  
13. Control of Heavy Loads Near Spent Fuel  
14. Seismic Design Criteria  
15. BWR Pipe Cracks  
16. Containment Emergency Sump Reliability  
17. Station Blackout  
*Denotes issue declared resolved by NRC.  
**Denotes issue declared resolved by NRC but still with pending  
questions, as discussed in text.  
ChapterS 135 systems is frequently assigned to teams with functional engineering specialties  
[that are inadequately co-ordinated] to enable them to identify adverse inter­actions between and among systems.' ' 32 In one such instance, at Zion Unit 2 in  
1977, test signals applied to plant sensors caused plant controls to reduce water  
inventory in the reactor coolant system while simultaneously disabling all  
automatic protection systems capable of detecting the loss of water. 33 The  
interaction in this case occurred between the plant's control system and  
protection system. Other systems interactions have involved failures (e.g.,  
loss of power to instruments) that caused automatic reactor shutdown and also  
generated spurious signals to instruments and controls that temporarily de­feated shutdown heat removal capability. 34  
Reactors are subject to a great number of potential systems interactions.  
Interconnected electrical or mechanical complexes are particularly prone since  
components can "run away" or "hang up" between their normal and failed  
state, leading to excessive voltage, frequency, flow, etc. or whatever service  
the system provides. 35 Nonconnected systems may also interact because fail­ure of their pneumatic, electrical, or hydraulic lines may degrade the others,  
through rupture of steam lines or compressed air systems, for example. As a  
result, systems interactions are difficult to anticipate, and thus hard to prevent.  
According to the ACRS,  
[Systems] interactions are likely to be unique to each plant and are unlikely  
to be revealed by LERs [Licensee Event Reports filed by utilities] since the  
probability for such interaction to occur may be modest ... [N]either LERs  
nor a study of plant diagrams and other drawings will consistently reveal  
the potential for such interactions between non-connected systems, be­cause such drawings generally show single features or systems ... Thus.  
uncovering the potentia/for [systems] interaction ... will usually require  
careful, in-situ examination of the plzysical plam . .. consider[ing] all  
features having the potential to damage safety systems, including the  
safety systems themselves. 36  
NRC intends to approach the issue by using "fault-tree" analysis to  
determine whether its current review procedures adequately account for  
potentially harmful interactions. The Three Mile Island accident, however,  
has forced NRC to undertake new studies of operator actions, design errors,  
and maintenance procedures37-issues that are central to systems interaction  
(the Zion episode was initiated by operator error and compounded by design  
inadequacy). Notwithstanding the May 1981 target date38 (postponed eight  
months from the year-earlier target), resolution appears far off. If NRC ulti­mately concludes that some harmful interactions cannot be anticipated, it may  
require segregating all components and circuits of certain safety systems in  
costly "bunkered" housings. 39 To prevent identified interactions, NRC might  
require less drastic but still costly remedies, such as improved equipment  
136 Chapter 5 qualification or greater physical separation.  
Of the other unresolved safety issues, only Seismic Design Criteria  
might have a similarly pervasive design impact, and it applies largely to  
existing reactors built to less stringent seismic criteria. But many USis could  
significantly affect future plants. Asymmetric Slowdown Loads might require  
modifying PWRs to prevent postulated ruptures in reactor coolant pipes from  
overstressing reactor vessel supports, a condition that could damage both  
normal and emergency cooling systems while preventing insertion of control  
rods to shut down the fission reaction. BWR Pressure Suppression Contain­ments could lead to major design changes if current designs are found to expose  
equipment in the "suppression pool" to unacceptably large dynamic effects  
from air and steam forced out of the drywell during a loss-of-coolant accident.d  
In Station Blackout, NRC is weighing further provision of diverse and re­dundant feedwater power sources to ensure that a complete loss of ale power  
from both the offsite grid and the onsite emergency diesels could be accom­modated safely.  
Progress toward resolving the unresolved safety issues has been "dis­appointing," according to the report of the NRC's Special Inquiry Group  
chaired by Mitchell Rogovin {the Rogovin Report). 40 The Kemeny Commis­sion surmised that ''labeling ... a problem as 'generic' may provide a conve­nient way of postponing decision on a difficult question'' by removing the  
issue from contention in licensing nearings. 41 By late 1980, NRC had resolved  
only three of the 17 USis it first designated in early 1978, and two of the three  
can hardly be considered settled.  
One of these, Residual Heat Removal Shutdown Requirements, was  
declared completed in 1979 because of equipment improvements mandated in  
the Standard Review PlanY Yet in mid-1980, NRC staff identified a new  
proposed US I, Shutdown Decay Heat Removal Requirements, which is similar  
to the old in both name and content. 43 The new issue is related to three  
post-TMI studies of heat removal systems which will assess the systems'  
reliability under degraded conditions (e.g., complete loss of feedwater),  
weigh the need for a diverse heat-removal path if secondary-side cooling (e.g.,  
through steam generators) is lost, and consider requiring a complete additional  
heat removal system. 44 One study was to be completed by the end of 1980,  
another by mid-1982, and no schedule has been set for the third, indicating the  
uncertainty attached to this "resolved" issue.  
Similarly, the research findings which "resolved" Fracture Toughness  
of Steam Generator and Reactor Coolant Pump (RCP) Supports (concerning  
the supports' structural integrity during accidents) pertain only to operating  
PWRs. 45 NRC is just beginning its review of new PWRs by asking licensees for  
d. Although this issue's title refers only to Mark I and II containments, the Mark Ill  
design now in construction is also addressed through former "Task A-39, .. concerning safety  
relief valve pool loads, which has been absorbed into the issue.  
Chapter 5 137 information on the geometry, weld characteristics, design loads, etc. of steam  
generator and RCP supports. Later it will assess all vessel supports, BWR  
coolant pump supports, and PWR pressurizer supports. 46 Recent cracking of  
all but one of the 48 support bolts for the steam generators at Prairie Island 1  
gives added impetus to this issue. 47  
The third "resolved" issue, Reactor Vessel Pressure Transient Protec­tion, does appear to have been completed. Relief valves are to be designed for  
greater pressure removal, and operating procedures are to be modified to  
prevent subjecting a cooled-down reactor vessel to high pressure-a combina­tion conducive to metal fatigue and fracture.e Indeed, true resolution of most  
of the unresolved issues will require increments of equipment adding to direct  
plant costs, aside from the indirect but high costs of design uncertainty while  
resolution is pending.  
Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards List: ACRS has long  
maintained its own lists of unresolved safety issues under the title, "Generic  
Items Relating to Light-Water Reactors." The first list, in 1972, showed 25  
resolved and 22 unresolved issues. Resolved issues were deleted and new ones  
added roughly annually until publication of the final March 1979 list of 25  
issues, including ten from the 1972 compilation. NRC drew eight issues from  
this list in formulating its list of USis. The other 17 issues are shown here in the  
box.  
The 17 were excluded from the NRC list because they were deemed not  
urgent to safety or were considered to be moving toward resolution through  
other processes, such as revision of regulatory guides. Nevertheless, all con­cern either possible inadequacies in systems in plants operating or being built,  
or potential improvements in safety over current designs. Resolution of many  
issues could have a considerable impact on the design and cost of new plants.  
Among issues involving uncertainties in present systems are questions  
pertaining to engineered safeguards, such as Containment Sprays (Item A-2),  
ECCS Valves (D-1), and Hermetic Seals (E-1); to plant designs for preventing  
accidents, such as Turbine Missiles (A-I) and Seismic Soil-Structure Inter­action (F-1 ); to plant behavior during accidents, such as Fuel Behavior Under  
Abnormal Conditions (A-5); and to vital instrumentation and controls, such as  
Computer Protection Systems (C-1). These issues concern plant safety and  
will require regulatory attention-a situation complicated in some cases by  
gaps in knowledge, such as in fuel behavior (A-5).  
e. Another issue, BWR Nozzle Cracking, appears close to resolution through develop­ment of a triple-sleeve sparger to stop feedwater nozzle cracking and elimination of control rod  
drive return lines that have suffered nozzle cracking. 48 But the BWR history of chronic pipe and  
component cracking, tlow induced vibration, and other primary system problems argues for  
caution in concluding that these design changes will end cracking without introducing other  
defects.  
138 ChapterS Advisory Committee On Reactor Safeguards  
Generic Safety Issues  
(March 1979 List, 49 excluding issues in NRC list)  
A. Issues From December 1972 List  
I . Turbine Missiles  
2. Effective Operation Of Containment Sprays In A LOCA  
3. Instruments To Detect Severe Fuel Failures  
4. Monitoring For Excessive Vibration Inside The Reactor  
Pressure V esse!  
5. Behavior Of Reactor Fuel Under Abnormal Conditions  
6. BWR Recirculation Pump Overspeed During A LOCA  
7. Advisability Of Seismic Scram  
8. ECCS Capability For Future Plants  
B. Issues Added In February 1974 List  
l. Ice Condenser Containments  
2. PWR Primary Coolant Pump Overspeed During A  
LOCA  
3. Periodic I 0-Year Review Of All Power Reactors  
C. Issue Added In March 1975 List  
I. Computer Reactor Protection System  
D. Issues Added In April 1976 List  
1. Locking Out Of ECCS Power Operated Valves  
2. Design Features To Control Sabotage  
3. Decontamination And Decommissioning Of Reactors  
E. Issue Added In February 1977 List  
l. Long-Term Capability Of Hermetic Seals On Instrumen­tation And Electrical Equipment  
F. Issue Added In November 1977 List  
1. Soil-Structure Interaction In Seismic Events  
Chapter 5 139 The potential design improvements in the ACRS list could also impose  
higher equipment costs. Instrumentation to detect severe fuel failure (A-3) and  
to monitor pressure vessel vibration (A-4) would require sensors, relays,  
circuitry, and other electrical equipment. Seismic scram capability (A-7)  
would entail an extra automatic reactor shutdown system triggered by seismic  
disturbances, as discussed in Section 5.1. Improved ECCS capability (A-8),  
which NRC staff is studying for possible designation as an unresolved safety  
issue, 50 could involve not only equipment modifications to enhance the  
system's reliability, but also design changes to facilitate reflooding of the  
reactor core, with attendant engineering analysis. Sabotage prevention fea­tures (D-2) could require, in addition to security and access-control systems,  
such design features as completely separated access controls for redundant  
safety systems, as well as operational rules prohibiting the same maintenance  
personnel from working on redundant safety ''trains.'' Similarly, decontami­nation and decommissioning (D-3) involve, inter alia, possible changes in  
materials and configurations for primary system equipment to reduce long­term radioactivity buildup, thereby reducing the need for periodic decontami­nation and simplifying reactor dismantlement at end of life.  
Furthermore, the criteria by which ACRS deems a generic issue resolved  
appear to be as loose as those applied by NRC in ranking its issues. ACRS  
defines "resolved" either "in an administrative sense, recognizing that tech­nical evaluation and satisfactory implementation are yet to be completed, or in  
a narrow or specific sense, recognizing that further steps are desirable . .. or  
that different aspects of the problem require further investigation. " 51 The  
Rogovin Report confirmed that ACRS's "definition of the 'resolution' of a  
generic issue does not consider its implementation, and the committee does not  
follow up on 'resolved' generic issues to determine whether or how they are  
being implemented by the NRC staff. " 52 Thus, among the 51 previously  
"resolved" ACRS issues are some that, in the words of one ACRS member,  
were "placed in the 'resolved' category prematurely because what was  
thought to be a regulatory position became 'unstuck' and was not imple­mented. " 53  
A prime example of such resolved but unsettled issues is Anticipated  
Transients Without Scram (ATWS). This issue, first raised in 1969, concerns  
the possible failure to insert the control rods immediately ("scram") to shut  
down the nuclear fission process following a sudden deviation from normal  
operating conditions (a' 'transient'') that causes reactor pressure and tempera­ture to rise. ACRS declared the A TWS issue resolved in 1973 by an AEC staff  
report that evaluated the likelihood and consequences of ATWS events and  
proposed remedial design changes. 54 Their implementation has been stalled  
ever since, however, by a concerted industry lobbying effort motivated by the  
conviction that only minimal improvements are necessary and that the AEC/  
NRC fixes would be very costly.  
Thus, ATWS has not actually been resolved. In fact, NRC designated it  
140 Chapter 5 as an unresolved safety issue in 1979, although ACRS has never restored it to  
its generic safety issues list. NRC currently plans to hold rulemaking hearings  
to consider improvements to scram systemsf and design changes to reduce the  
rate of fission in the event of scram failure. These could include, for BWRs,  
modification of circuitry governing control-rod injection, a recirculation­pump trip, an improved standby liquid control system, and a high-capacity  
automated boron system, and analogous changes for PWRs. Aside from the  
direct costs, estimated by NRC at up to $7/kW,55 but considered higher by  
industry, the delayed resolution of ATWS lends credence to the possibility that  
a significant fraction of the other 50 ACRS items were resolved in an ad­ministrative sense only, and that hardware changes lie ahead.  
Several of these formerly resolved items stand out as candidates for  
substantial new cost impacts: Hydrogen Control After a LOCA and Contain­ment Pressure Following a LOCA, both receiving post-TMI consideration (see  
next chapter); Performance of Critical Components in post-LOCA Environ­ment, a pressing issue due to industry's lapses in adhering to environmental  
qualification requirements; Instrumentation to Follow the Course of an Acci­dent, under revision prior to TMI; and lnse.rvice Inspection of Reactor Coolant  
Pressure Boundary and Detection and Location of Primary System Leaks,  
identified by the ACRS as issues resolved on a narrow basis meriting possible  
action. 56  
Finally, apart from the status of the NRC and ACRS issues, it needs to be  
recognized that even genuinely resolved issues may not have required changes  
in recently completed plants. Although some regulatory standards have been  
applied to many or all plants under construction, others have largely exempted  
plants in progress and have been directed primarily at new construction starts.  
Accordingly, truly resolved issues are not necessarily reflected in the cost of a  
typical 1978 plant. Implementation of some will thus show up as costincreases  
for many later plants. Of course, currently unresolved issues will carry further  
cost impacts from resolution during construction, with the considerable engi­neering effort, planning uncertainty, and logistical disruption which regula­tory and design changes can entail.  
New Unresolved Safety Issues: NRC's current list of !4 unresolved  
safety issues (a figure that excludes two issues that may become "unstuck," as  
argued above) may soon be at least doubled. NRC staff asked the Commission­ers in late 1980 to designate another seven new issues as US Is. The ACRS and  
the new Office for the Analysis and Evaluation of Operational Data (AEOD),  
created after Three Mile Island, have together proposed four more, and NRC  
staff is studying six other issues for possible USI designation (see box).  
Two issues, Seismic Qualification and DC Power Reliability, concern  
f. A partial failure to scram accident at Browns Ferry 3 in June !980, the most serious  
such episode at any U.S. commercial reactorto date, is discussed in Section 5.4  
Chapter5 141 142  
Possible New Unresolved Safety Issues  
(as of late 1980)  
Issues Recommended by NRC Staff*  
I. Shutdown Decay Heat Removal Requirements  
2. Control Room Design  
3. Consideration of Melted or Degraded Cores in Safety Reviews  
4. Long-Term Upgrading of Training and Qualifications of  
Operating Personnel  
5. Operating Procedures  
6. Seismic Qualification of Equipment in Operating Plants  
7. Control System Reliability  
Issues Being Studied by NRC Staff*  
I. Reliance on ECCS  
2. In-Situ Testing of Valves  
3. Protective Device Reliability  
4. PWR Pipe Cracks  
5. BWR Main Steam Isolation Valve Leakage Control Systems  
6. Radiation Effects on Reactor Vessel Supports  
Other Issues Recommended by ACRS**  
I. DC Power System Reliability  
2. Single Failure Criterion  
Other Issues Recommended by AEOD***  
I. Safety Implications of Steam Generator Transients and Acci­dents  
2. Piping and Use of Highly Combustible Gases in Vital Areas  
*Reference 43, and Reference 57 for Control System Reliability.  
**See Reference 58.  
***See Reference 59.  
Chapter 5 only existing plants, while another six-the Single Failure Criterion and the  
first five issues in the list of NRC recommendations-arise directly from Three  
Mile Island and are discussed in Chapter 6. The other nine issues, however,  
have been prompted primarily by problems at other reactors (several of these  
are discussed in the next section). Moreover, NRC anticipates that in addition  
to its seven recommended new USis, five to six more will be added the  
following year, with a steady rate of three anually thereafter. 60  
Section 5.4: New Safety Issues From Reactor Operating  
Experience  
Reactor operating experience has been identified as a major source of  
information leading to more stringent regulatory standards (Chapter 3).  
Reactor operation may reveal heretofore unanticipated safety problems or  
demonstrate that previously identified problems are not being adequately  
resolved by current designs. (Conversely, favorable operating experience can  
lead to a relaxation of safety margins, but this appears to occur relatively  
infrequently.)  
The rate at which operating experience reveals new safety risks is  
critically important. The detection rate of such risks per year strongly affects  
the pace of imposition of new safety requirements, and thus of higher costs, for  
nuclear plants. In turn, this rate will be determined by changes in the number of  
safety defects discovered per reactor-year of operation. If plant designs were  
static, this latter rate should constantly be falling, since the "pool" of un­detected defects would shrink as safety problems surfaced in operation. In  
practice, however, the increased size, complexity, and perhaps scrutiny of  
reactors appear to have added many new safety defects to the pool, so that the  
rate of detection of defects per plant has risen, not fallen.  
This key trend is indicated by records of issuance of generic (applicable  
to many reactors) safety-problem communications to licensees by the NRC's  
Office of Inspection and Enforcement (see box). After dipping briefly in 1975,  
the combined rate of issuance of NRC Bulletins and Circulars per reactor rose  
in each of the next three years, far surpassing the levels in the early 1970s (see  
Figure 5. 1). The rate shot up funher in I 979, in part due to the NRC's  
increased post· TMI emphasis on monitoring operating experience. Since the  
accident, NRC's generic communications to licensees, mostly drawn from  
operating experience, have been running at almost three times the per-reactor  
rate in the early-1970s.  
Thus, not only the nuclear sector as a whole but the typical operating  
reactor as well is contributin.g to detection of new safety problems at an all-time  
high rate. And even if, as is likely, the per-reactor rate were to decline in the  
future, it would probably fall only gradually. Moreover, because the number  
of operating plants is increasing, the detection rate of safety problems per year  
ChapterS 143 NRC Safety-Communications Media  
NRC's Office of Inspection and Enforcement uses three  
media to apprise licensees of new developments, mostly arising  
from operating experience, pertaining to reactor safety and design.  
Bulletins, issued since 1971, describe specific actions that  
licensees must take-analyses, tests, equipment replacements, or  
design changes-in response to' 'events in which the safety signifi­cance is of such a magnitude as to result in an immediate impact on  
all of a certain type of licensee. " 61 Recent bulletins have con­cerned seismic deficiencies, feed water system pipe cracks, inoper­ability of heat removal systems, and loss of BWR scram capability,  
among other issues.  
Circulars, issued since 1976, notify licensees of actions  
recommended by NRC in safety matters that are "generally of  
lesser significance" than those addressed by bulletins. 62 Unlike  
bulletins, circulars do not require licensee response. Many have  
considerable safety import, however. Recent circulars have ad­dressed, for example, lubrication problems in emergency diesel  
generators and ECCS turbine drives, inadequate environmental  
qualification of safety-related electrical equipment, and reactor  
vessel steam voids caused by loss of cooling water flow to reactor  
coolant pumps.  
would still continue to rise for some time. (This occurred during 1971-74, as  
the number of Bulletins increased each year despite the absence of an increase  
per reactor, as Figure 5.2 shows.) Accordingly, a constant stream of new  
reactor malfunctions should be expected, raising new safety issues and re­activating old ones, requiring remedial actions that will raise reactor costs.  
Although the safety issues that will emerge from (or be confirmed by)  
future operating experience are not now discernible, the types of problems that  
will arise may be illustrated by recent operating experience. One malfunction  
of note was the failure of 40 percent of the control rods to "scram" (insert  
rapidly and fully to shut down the reactor) automatically upon command at  
Browns Ferry 3 in June 1980. 64  
Scram failure could have extremely serious consequences. Operators  
required 14 minutes to achieve manual scram at Browns Ferry, but scram time  
was not critical since the shutdown had been planned. Failure to scram rapidly  
in the event of a "transient," such as a turbine "trip" (shut-of!), could leave  
144 Chapter 5 Information Notices were begun in 1979 to provide early  
warning of issues that may subsequently prove important to safety.  
They are generally less significant than, and sometimes overlap  
with, bulletins and circulars. Nevertheless, NRC sometimes em­ploys information notices to transmit original safety concerns,  
such as cracking in ECCS piping (Notice 80-15), violation of  
separation criteria for ECCS cables (Notice 79-32), and unavail­ability of safety systems due to design deficiencies in power sup­plies (Notice. 79-04).  
Figures 5.1 and 5.2 employ the combined number of bulle­tins and circulars as the best measure of NRC safety-related com­munications. Although circulars are usually less vital to safety and  
do not have as great an impact, they do convey important imforma­tion and as a category are somewhat interchangeable with bulle­tins. NRC says that is has "shifted some of what were formerly  
bulletins into circulars and information notices.' ' 63 The latter, less  
central to safety and sometimes redundant, are not included in the  
figures for conservatism.  
A fourth communications medium is letters to licensees by  
NRC's Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation. Like bulletins, NRC  
letters concern potential safety matters and require a written re­sponse. Unfortunately, they are filed by docket (reactor) number,  
and are not compiled in any available list.  
the reactor fissioning at full or partial power with no heat-removal path, a  
condition that could cause core overheating, leading to fuel melting and,  
potentially, to significant core damage. (This is the subject concern of ATWS,  
discussed in the preceding section.)  
The Browns Ferry partial scram failure was caused by undetected water  
accumulation in the "scram discharge volume system" (SDV) which pre­vented the hydraulic action necessary to force the control rods into the core.  
The water had accumulated after a previous scram because of blockage in the  
SDV vent or drain. In turn, the accumulation was not detected because  
water-level instrumentation was located in a separate tank that was incorrectly  
calibrated to the SDV. 6 5  
Remedial action has already begun at Browns Ferry and other BWRs,  
with installation of vents which open to the atmosphere to prevent creation of a  
vacuum that could impede water drainage. NRC is also likely to require that the  
two halves of the SDV be built to safety-grade standards and made indepen­Chapter 5 145 .9  
.8  
.6  
.5  
.3  
.2  
.1  
Figure 5.1  
NRC Bulletins And Circulars Per Operating Reactor  
~Circulars  
Osulletins  
.54  
.25 .27  
.19  
Bar widths represent numbers of licensed operating reactors (including partiaJ years from  
commercial start. excluding units under 400 MW).  
Supplements to Bulletins and Circulars are not included.  
Circulars were begun in 1976. Upper figures denote total of Bulletins and Circulars.  
dent. This would require directly connecting the scram discharge volume and  
the instrument volume, doubling the number of vent and drain lines, and  
adding about a half-dozen new valves. 66 The AEOD has proposed other  
corrective measures, including a diverse instrument to monitor SDV water  
level, advanced monitoring techniques such as differential pressure cells, and  
installing redundant, automatic valves on all vent and drain paths from the  
SDV and associated instrument lines. 67  
The implications of the Browns Ferry scram failure do not end with these  
equipment additions, however. The accident undercut the nuclear industry's  
contention that scram systems were sufficiently reliable to obviate the need for  
design features to mitigate an ATWS event. It will undoubtedly lead NRC to  
adopt more stringent A TWS requirements than would otherwise have been  
considered. 68 In the same fashion, the scram failure will make at least some  
regulators more skeptical of probabilistic analyses which purport to prove that  
particular safety systems are highly reliable69-an important issue discussed  
in Chapter 6.  
Another problem area highlighted by recent experience is control system  
146 Chapter 5 60[  
50  
40  
30  
20  
10  
Year  
Figure 5.2  
NRC Bulletins And Circulars Per Year  
~C1rculars  
DBullevns  
6  
73  
16  
8  
76 76 77 78  
Figure 5. I explanations of Bulletins and Circulars apply here.  
79  
reliability. On three occasions in as many years, a failure in power supply for  
non-nuclear instrumentation (NNI) at a Babcock & Wilcox reactor caused the  
integrated control system (ICS) to initiate an abrupt change in reactor status  
while leaving the operator without the information needed to understand and  
recover from the abnormal plant condition.g  
The accident at Rancho Seco in 1978 started when a light bulb was  
dropped inside a control console, causing faults in two-thirds of the NNI  
signals to the ICS and the control room. Feed water flow to the steam generators  
was cut off for nine minutes, causing both generators to boil dry, and correct  
information was not restored to the control room for 70 minutes. 70 At Oconee 3  
in 1979, operation of the ICS and most instrumentation was interrupted for  
several minutes after a fuse in the NNI system blew, leading to excessively  
g. Non~nuclear instrumentation reports critical parameters such as reactor coolant system  
temperature, pressure and flow; steam generator pressure and level; and pressurizer level; it  
excludes only core-related variables such as neutron flux. The integrated control system at B&W  
plants co-ordinates the reactor, feed water supply to the steam generators, and the steam turbine.  
Chapter 5 147 rapid cooling of the reactor coolant system. 71 In 1980, 70% of the NNI  
indicators were either lost or sent false signals to the ICS after a short circuit at  
Crystal River 3, causing one steam generator to go dry and leading to a large  
spill of reactor coolant into the containment. 72 In each case, decay heat  
removal mechanisms which much function following reactor trip were either  
lost or partially unavailable.  
These accidents point up serious inadequacies in industry's and NRC's  
approach to reactor control systems. First, they show that control system  
design can affect the number and types of transients which safety systems must  
arrest. Second, they demonstrate that failure of control systems may impede or  
even negate operation of the necessary safety systems. 73 Third, they raise  
concerns regarding the availability and accuracy of information normally  
supplied to the operator. 74 Previously, it was assumed that failure of control  
systems would neither interfere with safety systems nor affect information  
flow.  
The accidents have led NRC staff, with considerable prodding from  
ACRS, to nominate Control System Reliability as an unresolved safety issue.  
In its pending review, NRC is likely to designate much non-nuclear instrumen­tation at all reactors as safety-grade, and thus subject to QA requirements. In  
addition, a third instrument train for some plant variables could be required to  
help operators resolve contradictory information which could arise if one of the  
present two trains fails. 75 Other design changes, including greater separation  
of power supplies for instrumentation and control equipment, could also result  
from the review . 
76  
The failures of control and scram systems are only a sample of the  
problems emerging in reactor operating experience. During 1979 and 1980,  
NRC issued Bulletins and Circulars at the rate of almost one per reactor-year,  
or about 50 annually. Other recent Bulletins have concerned deficiencies in  
seismic design and construction, inadequate environmental qualification of  
electrical components, poor design of jet pump "hold-down" beams, and  
operability of residual heat removal systems, among many other deficiencies.  
In addition, a 1979 ACRS review of utility "Licensee Event Reports"  
identified a number of operating "events having potentially serious safety  
implications" 77 not discussed here. They include flow-induced vibration in  
equipment and piping carrying water and/or steam which "frequently cause[s]  
failure of equipment, electrical wiring or components, pumps, valves and  
piping systems;" 78 leakage between interconnected fluid systems (through  
isolation valves) that can defeat differences in pressures or chemical concen­trations needed by separated systems; degradation of containment isolation  
through failure of containment monitoring systems needed to actuate isolation,  
for example; and possible loss of engineered safety features through human  
error or equipment failure such as inadvertent isolation of safety systems when  
malfunctioning ventilation simulates leaks in the systems themselves.  
148 Chapter5 The presence of problem areas such as these, the frequency with which  
they issue from reactor operating experience, and the difficulty of satisfactorily  
resolving previously identified issues appear to ensure a large body of pressing  
safety concerns to affect reactor regulation, design, and construction for many  
years to come.  
References  
I. New York Times, 2 June 1979, "Three Mile Island Nuclear Plant Was Exempt Prom  
Radiation Rules."  
2. NRC, Office of Inspection and Enforcement, Bulletins 79-02 and 79-14.  
3. NRC, Office of Inspection and Enforcement, Infonnation Notice 80-26.  
4. Reference 3.  
5. GAO, The Nuclear Regulatory Commission Needs co Aggressively Monitor and Inde­pendently Evaluate Nuclear Powerplant Construction, EMD-78-80 ( 1978), p. ii.  
6. Reference 3.  
7. NRC, NRC Action Plan Developed as a Result of the TMl-2 Accident, NUREG-0660  
(1980), p. ll.J.2-l.  
8. lnsideN.R.C., 16June 1980, p. 4.  
9. Reference 8.  
10. IEEE, IEEE Std 323-1974, "Qualifying Class IE Equipment for Nuclear Power  
Generating Stations.,'  
I I. NRC Commissioner Peter Bradford, Speech of 24 September 1980, NRC Release  
No. S-!3-80.  
12. NRC Commissioner Victor Gilinsky, Statement on North Anna 2 Pull Power Authori­zation, 21 August 1980, NRC Release No. 80-152.  
13. NRC, Memorandum and Order CLI-80-21, 23 May 1980, p. 10. See also Office of  
Inspection and Enforcement communications pertaining to equipment qualification: Bulletins  
77-05, 77-0SA, 78-02. 79-0 l, 79-0 lA. 79-0! B, and three Supplements to 79-0 I B; and Circulars  
78-08 and 80-10.  
14. Reference 13 (NRC Memorandum and Order), p. 10.  
15. Reference 13 (NRC Memorandum and Order), p.ll.  
16. Reference 13; and NRC, Interim Staff Position on Environmental Qualification of  
Safety-Related Electrical Equipment, NUREG-0588 (1979).  
17. Reference 16 (NUREG-0588), p. 15.  
18. Reference 16 (NUREG-0588), p. 7.  
19. Reference 16 (NUREG-0588), p. !.  
20. Reference 16 (NUREG-0588), p. 10.  
21. G.E. Cummings, J.E. Wells, and H.E. Lambert, Nuclear Safety, 19 (No.5), 590  
(1978).  
Chapter 5 149 22. See, for example, Lawrence Livermore Laboratory and ANCO Engineers, Inc.,  
Methods and Benefits of Experimental Seismic Evaluation of Nuclear Power Plants, NUREG/  
CR-1443 (1980).  
23. See, for example, Science, 209, 1004-1007 (1980); andY. Jih-Ting & Y.P. Aggar­wal, "Seismotechtonics of Northeastern United States and Eastern Canada," submitted to J.  
Geophysical Research.  
24. IEEE, IEEE Std 383, "Class IE Electric Cables, Field Splices, and Connections for  
Nuclear Power Generating Stations" ( 1974); endorsed by NRC Regulatory Guide !. 131, "Qual­ifications Tests of Electric Cables, Field Splices, and Connections for Light-Water-Cooled  
Nuclear Power Plants" ( 1977).  
25. Inside N.R .C., 22 October 1979, pp. 8-9.  
26. NRC Office of Standards Development, "Regulatory Guides Under Development,"  
24 April 1979, first drafted in March 1979.  
27. /nsideN.R.C., 28July 1980, p. 3.  
28. Reference 26.  
29. NRC, Annual Report to Congress, /979, NUREG-0690 ( 1980), p. 66.  
30. NRC, NRC Program for the Resolution of Generic Issues Related to Nuclear Power  
Plants, NUREG-0410 (1978).  
31. NRC, Identification of Unresolved Safety Issues Relating to Nuclear Power Plants,  
NUREG-0510 ( 1979), p. 16.  
32. Reference 29, pp. 77-78.  
33. NRC, Office oflnspection and Enforcement, Circular 77 -13; and letter from Robert  
Pollard, Union of Concerned Scientists, to Attorney General Griffin Bell, 13 October 1977.  
34. See ACRS, Review of Licensee Event Reports, 1976-1978, NUREG-0572 ( 1979), pp.  
D-8 through D-12 and D-19 through D-22, for detailed accounts of several systems interaction  
events.  
35. ACRS, Letter to NRC Chairman, "Systems Interaction Study for Indian Point  
Nuclear Generating Unit No. 3," 12 October 1979.  
36. Reference 35. Emphasis added.  
37. Reference 29, pp. 79-80.  
38. Reference 29, p. 67.  
39. Nucleonics Week, II May 1978, p. 8.  
40. NRC Special Inquiry Group, Three Mile Island: A Report to the Commissioners and  
to the Public, NUREG/CR-1250, Vol. II ( 1980), p. 2!.  
4!. J .G. Kemeny eta/., Report of the President's Commission on the Accident at Three  
Mile Island, p. 20.  
42. Reference 29, p. 80.  
43. NRC Staff Paper, "Special Report to Congress Identifying New Unresolved Safety  
Issues," SECY-80-325, 9 July 1980.  
44. Reference 7, Task II.E.3.  
45. NRC, Potentia/for Low Fracture Toughness and Lamellar Tearing on PWR Steam  
150 Chapter 5 Generators and Reactor Coolant Pump Supports, NUREG-0577 (1979), p. 10.  
46. Reference 45. p. 3.  
47. NRC, Office of Inspection and Enforcement, Information Notice No. 80-36.  
48, NRC, BWR F eedwarer Nozzle and Control Rod Drive Return Line Nozzle Cracking,  
NUREG-0619 (1980).  
49. ACRS, Generic ftems Reports, 15 November 1977 and 21 March 1979.  
50. Reference 43.  
51. ACRS, Genericltems Report, 15 November 1977, p. 2. Emphasis added.  
52. Reference 40, Vol. ll, p. 50.  
53. David Okrent, On the History of Light Water Reactor Safety in the United Stares  
(University of California at Los Angeles, 1979, unpublished manuscript), p. 6-18.  
54. AEC, Technical Report on Anticipated Transients Without Scram for Water-Cooled  
Power Reactors, WASH-1270 (1973).  
55. NRC Staff Paper, "Proposed Rulemaking to Amend 10 CFR Part 50 Concerning  
Anticipated Transients Without Scram (ATWS) Events," SECY-80-409, 4 September 1980.  
56. See Reference 51.  
57. NRC, Memorandum from Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation to Chairman, 10  
September 1980.  
58. ACRS, Letter to NRC Chairman, 12August 1980.  
59. NRC, Memorandum from AEOD to Chairman, 4 August 1980.  
60, Reference 43, p. 4.  
61. Reference 29, p. 159.  
62. Reference 29, p. !59.  
63. Telephone communication with Ed Jordan, Assistant Director for Technical Pro­grams, NRC Office ofinspection and Enforcement, 4 September 1980.  
64. This event, and subsequently discovered problems with BWR scram systems, were  
reported in NRC, Office of Inspection and Enforcement, Bulletin 80-17, three supplements  
thereto, and Information Notice 80-30. The Bulletin and supplements were counted as only one  
Bulletin in Figures 5.1 and 5.2.  
65. NRC, AEOD. "Report on the Browns Ferry 3 Partial Failure to Scram Event on June  
28, 1980," 30 July 1980, Section 8.  
66. Reference 63.  
67. NRC, Memorandum from AEOD to Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation, 18 August  
1980; and Inside N.R.C., II August 1980, p. 10.  
68. lnsideN.R.C., II August 1980,pp. 17-18.  
69. David Okrent, "New Trends in Safety Design and Analysis." paper presented at  
International Atomic Energy Agency Conference on Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues,  
October 1980, p. 11.  
70. NRC, "Current Events, Power Reactors," June 1978.  
ChapterS 151 71. NRC, Power Reactor Events, 2 (No.2), March 1980; and Office of Inspection and  
Enforcement. Bulletin No. 19-27.  
72. Reference 71 (No.3), May 1980; and Office of Inspection and Enforcement, Informa­tion Notice No. 80·10.  
73. NRC, Memorandum from Robert Bernero and F.H. Rowsome to Office of Nuclear  
Reactor Regulation and AEOD, 14 March 1980.  
74. This description of control system inadequacies was adapted from Reference 69, p. 8.  
75. ACRS, Letter to NRC Chairman, 10 June 1980.  
76. Reference 75.  
77. Reference 34, p. 3-1 ff.  
78. Reference 34, p. D-13.  
!52 ChapterS 6  
The Impact Of  
Three Mile Island  
On Nuclear Regulatory  
Requirements  
The March 1979 accident at the Three Mile Island (TMI) reactor in  
Pennsylvania will affect design and construction requirements for nuclear  
plants in several fundamental ways. Because the accident extensively dam­aged the reactor core and was' 'evidently a significant precursor of a core-melt  
accident,'' 1 the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) will now make "ex­plicit consideration of accidents involving severely damaged or molten  
cores" 2 in its licensing reviews. This will almost certainly cause substantial  
upgrading of systems for emergency core cooling, decay heat removal, radia­tion protection, instrumentation and control, and emergency management. It  
may also lead to significant new design features such as "core ladles" or  
"filtered, vented containments" to accommodate damaged cores.  
Perhaps more importantly, both the occurrence of the accident and the  
errors and malfunctions that characterized it have severely challenged basic  
premises in NRC's approach to safety. Previously, plants were licensed ac­cording to their ability to mitigate a set of design basis accidents. Safety­related equipment was designed and built to meet the single failure criterion to  
ensure that the vital flow of cooling water to the reactor core was maintained,  
regardless of the status of non-safety equipment.• The accident, however,  
"exceeded many of the present design bases by a wide margin" 3 because of  
multiple failures involving both safety-related and non-safety equipment.  
Finally, the accident underscored important analytical and administra­tive gaps in NRC's regulatory policy that will need to be remedied, at probable  
great cost to the nuclear industry. NRC was pre-occupied with "large-break"  
loss-of-coolant accidents and thus virtually ignored accidents involving limit­ed coolant loss as occurred at TMI, even though such accidents were con­a. These terms are explained later in the text.  
Chapter6 !53 sidered much more likely. 4 Its policy of "grandfathering" some regulations  
contributed 'to the release of radioactivity from within the containment to the  
auxiliary building, and thence to the atmosphere, even though a regulation  
requiring redundant containment isolation predated plant start-up by several  
years. Most damningly of all, NRC took no preventive steps following TMI  
"dress rehearsal" incidents at other reactors and failed to heed an analysis of  
design weaknesses in Babcock & Wilcox (B&W) reactors that anticipated the  
accident.  
As a result, TMI has occasioned "an across-the-board re-examination of  
the present regulatory system [in which] the entire complex of design, manu­facturing, operation, and ... regulation [is] on trial," according to Nuclear  
Engineering International. This will lead to "upgraded requirements in virtu­ally all areas and new approaches to safety in many of them," 5 even in  
systems that were not directly at fault in the accident. As the director of the  
Nuclear Power Division of the Electric Power Research Institute has acknow­ledged,  
A significant number of the lessons [from TMI], perhaps the majority of  
lessons, will have nothing to do with the accident, but will be learned  
because the system is being subjected to a scrutiny considerably more  
intense than has been the case in the recent past. 6  
Accordingly, "licensing stability," the holy grail of fixed design re­quirements perenially pursued by the nuclear industry, is now "a total loss,"  
in the words of one senior industry executive said to have long been involved in  
licensing issues. 12 The Three Mile Island accident "has permanently altered  
the regulatory process for nuclear power," states a recent Department of  
Energy (DOE) analysis. 13 New regulatory requirements will be added and  
current ones modified at accelerated rates, and costs will grow apace.  
Section 6.1: Three Mile Island And NRC's Approach To  
Safety  
Prior to TMI, NRC based its licensing of reactors upon provisions made  
in plant designs to prevent or mitigate a group of specific, postulated accidents.  
This group either included or was supposed to ''envelop,'' by virtue of the  
severity of the assumed accident sequences, all conceivable mishaps except for  
so-called "Class 9" accidents. These are calamities considered so unlikely­and in some cases believed so difficult to mitigate- that reactor designs were  
not required to withstand their hypothetical occurrence. 14 Among the Class 9  
accidents excluded from the "design basis" were all accidents involving  
significant core damage, including a core meltdown, wherein the buildup of  
heat from a loss of reactor coolant causes the fuel rods to melt, creating a  
154 Chapter6 Bechtel On Three Mile Island And Its Aftermath  
One view of TMI within the nuclear industry is that its  
apparently limited consequences demonstrate that current reactor  
designs provide sufficient safety margins. The major changes  
needed are operational and managerial reforms that can be enacted  
quickly and cheaply. For example, in June 1980 W. Kenneth  
Davis, vice president of Bechtel Power Corporation, told a parlia­mentary committee weighing Great Britain's nuclear policy:  
Probably the most important lesson learned was that the  
avoidance of accidents depends more on human and institu­tional factors than on design features.  
The most important lessons learned were implemented for  
operating plants within a short time after the accident.  
The main conclusion to the Kemeny review was that nuclear  
power should proceed, but proceed with caution. 7  
These statements are open to serious question, however. The many  
TMI-related design changes and equipment requirements under  
NRC consideration belie the notion that most of TMI's legacy is  
already in place in tile form of low-cost "software" improve­ments. Similarly, the Kemeny Commission "gave no such yellow  
light" to the nuclear industry8 as Davis alleges in the last excerpt  
above. Indeed, the Commission expressly "did not attempt to  
reach a conclusion as to whether ... the development of commer­cial nuclear power should be continued.' ' 9 Its report did state as its  
fundamental conclusion that:  
To prevent nuclear accidents as serious as Three Mile Island,  
fundamental changes will be necessary in the organization,  
procedures, and practices-and above all-in the attitudes of  
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and, to the extent that  
the institutions we investigated are typical, of the nuclear  
industry. 10  
Finally, if the Kemeny Commission members ''chose not to  
stress the need for specific technological improvements, [this was]  
because they thought more specialized studies now being drafted  
would do just that," according to Science. 11 And indeed, NRC's  
comprehensive, 500-page TMI "Action Plan," published in May  
1980, promises extensive new software and hardware, as dis­cussed in Sections 6.2 and 6.3.  
Chapter6 !55 molten core that could potentially breach the containment and release a signi·  
fie ant fraction of the reactor's inventory of radioactivity.  
To judge the reliability of systems intended to prevent design basis  
accidents, NRC employed a concept called the single failure criterion. As  
explained by the Rogovin Report, the detailed TMI inquiry commissioned by  
NRC,  
This criterion is a requirement that a system designed to carry out a specific  
safety function must be able to fulfill its mission in spite of the failure of  
any single component within the system, or failure in an associated system  
that supports its operation. (In reality, the single failure criterion is a  
double failure criterion: it requires that the design must be able to bring the  
plant to a safe shutdown despite occurrence of an accident plus the failure  
of any one additional safety component or system.) 15  
Although the single failure criterion promoted reliability by requiring that  
reactors contain redundant and diverse systems for preventing accidents, it  
also was used to set an upper bound on safety: NRC did not require that designs  
mitigate accidents in which two or more "safety-related" components or  
systems fail independently.  
Moreover, the only systems and components required to meet the single  
failure criterion- indeed, the only ones considered in NRC's reviews- were  
those that the applicant, subject to NRC approval, deemed safety-related. This  
comprised all equipment which, according to the applicant's or NRC's anal­ysis, would be needed to shut the reactor, remove decay heat, and contain  
radioactivity during design basis accidents. Non-safety items are "not re­viewed by the NRC to see whether they will perform as intended or meet  
various dependability criteria [nor do they] receive continuing regulatory  
supervision or surveillance to see that they are properly maintained or that their  
design is not changed in some way that might interact negatively with other  
systems. " 16  
The TMI accident revealed serious shortcomings in each of these con­structs upon which NRC has based its approach to safety. First, the "sequence  
of events (and the degree of] core damage [were] more severe than those  
considered in current design basis events." 17 Core temperatures exceeded  
3500°F, 18 a level at least 1300°F above the design basis for emergency cooling  
systems. The chemical reaction between water and the zirconium fuel claddiag  
generated five to ten times as much potentially explosive hydrogen as is  
specified in designing hydrogen control systems. 19 Fuel pellets and stainless  
steel parts of fuel assemblies cracked, crumbled, and may have melted and  
fused together. 20 Although such damage was considered possible before the  
accident, it was excluded from the design basis since plant safety features were  
provided to prevent it21 and its probability of occurrence was judged so low as  
to make it incredible.  
!56 Chapter6 Second, several multiple failures compounded the accident, demonstrat­ing the inadequacy of the single failure criterion. Auxiliary feed water, a safety  
system counted on to maintain the flow of reactor coolant when the main  
feedwater supply was interrupted, was lost in the initial minutes because both  
redundant discharge valves were closed. Both independent trains of another  
automatic safety system, the Emergency Core Cooling System (ECCS) high­pressure injection system, were turned off for several hours by the operator.  
Third, equipment categorized as non-safety-related not only initiated the  
accident (through failure of the entire feed water purification system due to one  
malfunctioning component), as NRC and industry analyses assume, but also  
unexpectedly aggravated it. The pressurizer relief valve that stuck open,  
allowing water to flow out of the reactor vessel in the equivalent of a "small­break" loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA), was not safety-related and so was  
not subject to strict requirements for fabrication, qualification, and redun­dancy. Nor was the instrumentation which indicated merely that the valve had  
been signaled to close but did not show that it had stuck open. Similarly, the  
thermocouples that correctly indicated dangerously high core temperatures,  
but which the operators apparently disregarded due to past failures, were not  
safety-related. In fact, control room design, operator procedures, and most  
instrumentation, all of which were heavily implicated in the accident, were not  
labelled safety-related and so were not reviewed by NRC.b In particular, it was  
assumed that operators might not activate safety systems, but not that they  
might defeat them.  
These "failure modes" carry profound implications for nuclear safety  
regulation. First, because "some accidents are outside or are not adequately  
assessed within the [current] 'design envelope,' " 22 NRC will expand the  
spectrum of design basis accidents used for safety assessments. "Degraded  
core'' and core-melt accidents will receive particular attention in both analysis  
and design. 23 NRC's pending rulemaking on degraded cores will consider for  
the first time design changes necessary in major plant systems-containment,  
emergency cooling, decay heat removal, and radiation control-to cope with  
major core damage.  
Second, NRC is beginning to upgrade the single failure criterion to  
require that some safety systems be designed to perform despite multiple  
independent failures in addition to an assumed initiating failure. NRC has  
already abandoned the criterion for auxiliary feedwater systems by requiring  
licensees to adopt operating procedures that can compensate for loss of that  
system, even though it is intended to withstand single failures. The Commis­b. The TMI operators did employ some non-safety-related equipment to recover from the  
accident. Although some equipment items did thus function beyond their design requirements.  
others such as the reactor coolant pumps (which augmented coolant circulation) were severely  
strained in doing so and cannot be relied upon to mitigate other accidents. In fact, the pumps were  
shut off approximately I \1, hours into the accident due to severe vibration, tenninating coolant  
flow and leading to core damage.  
Chapter6 !57 sion is also considering requiring additional power supplies in the event that a  
plant is "blacked out" from the transmission grid and its onsite power systems  
fail (two independent failures) during a "transient" that shuts the plant  
generator. 24  
More fundamentally, the Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards  
(ACRS) has concluded that the single failure criterion "is more likely to be  
applicable only to very simple systems'' such as design of electric circuitry.  
for which it was originally devised. 25 "For complex systems [such as nuclear  
plant safety systems] multiple failures may be experienced subsequent to the  
initial failure and some other standard of acceptability is needed.' ' 26 Says the  
ACRS,  
[A]ttention must be devoted to the sequences and consequences that could  
result from many different combinations of multiple mistakes or failures,  
two or three or five, or even six, as necessary to determine the possible  
interactions and their consequences .. P  
This approach would significantly expand NRC failure assumptions, primarily  
by requiring consideration of the consequences of losing redundant safety  
systems for a wide range of accidents.  
NRC's proposed successor to the single failure criterion is a program for  
developing complete taxonomies of accident sequences which allow for  
operator error, multiple failures of active safety-related components, and  
single failures of passive components.< The "Interim Reliability Evaluation  
Program" (!REP) is expected to provide the means "to identify particularly  
high-risk accident sequences at individual plants and determine regulatory  
initiatives to reduce these high-risk sequences. " 28 NRC does not expect to  
complete the risk analyses for each plant until at least 1983, however, 29 after  
which the analyses and debates over proposed design and equipment changes  
would begin. Accordingly, although the impact of upgrading the single failure  
criterion cannot be charted today, the effort to do so will involve considerable  
uncertainty that will aggravate the many significant ongoing problems in  
reactor design and construction.  
Finally, "[t]he current classification of systems and equipment into  
'safety-related' and 'nonsafety-related' is especially unsatisfactory," said the  
Rogovin Report, 30 and "NRC's past emphasis on ill-defined, safety-related  
systems and components has caused it to miss important safety issues,"  
according to the General Accounting Office (GAO)?' In the future, more  
equipment will be subject to NRC requirements for redundancy, diversity,  
c. Active components require mechanical motion to fulfill their safety functions, e.g.,  
opening of a valve, as distinguished from passive components such as pipes that do not require  
actuation. To date, NRC has not required licensees to postulate failure of safety-related passive  
components in mechanical systems.  
!58 Chapter6 qualification, and strict quality assurance (QA). NRC has begun to expand the  
safety-related category, (e.g., to include pressurizer relief valves), and it is  
also considering establishing intermediate classifications between systems  
judged most and least important to safety, based on the findings of the IREP  
program. Special attention will be given to potentially harmful effects of  
nonsafety equipment on safety equipment-a long-time concern of ACRS3 2- 
in part through a regulatory guide that NRC hopes to issue in late 1983  
instructing licensees to apply QA criteria to nonsafety systems whose failure  
may pose risks. 33 (See Section 6.3 for further discussion of QA after Three  
Mile Island.)  
Section 6.2: Effect OfTMI On Equipment And Design  
"The accident at TMI," reports NRC's TMI Action Plan, "demon­strated the reality of the risk, previously only theoretically assessed, of acci­dents that result in substantial degradation and melting of the core." Accord­ingly, "[t}he Action Plan calls for the development and implementation of a  
number of phased actions dealing with explicit consideration of accidents  
involving severely damaged or molten cores. 34  
These actions and oth_er prospective design and equipment changes  
stemming from TMI are discussed in the following sequence: rulemaking on  
degraded cores, improvements in instrumentation, control room, and emer­gency preparedness, ECCS and decay heat removal systems, and radiation  
protection.  
Rulemaking on Degraded Cores: NRC's major action to develop post­TMI design and equipment requirements is a rulemaking to establish policy  
concerning possible accidents that fall outside the current design basis. The  
rulemaking will consider: 35 '  
(I) Filtered-vented systems to relieve containment pressure  
by venting steam and gases through clean-up, heat-absorbing de­vices. These systems, still in the conceptual stage, might consist of  
pools of water with submerged gravel-sand filters.  
(2) Core ladles designed to temporarily contain a molten  
fuel core that has burned through the reactor vessel, perhaps simi­lar to the magnesium oxide "core catcher" once considered for  
floating nuclear plants.  
(3) Hydrogen control measures to prevent hydrogen-oxygen  
explosions inside containment. Possible measures include main­taining an oxygen-free containment ("inerting"), controlled­ignition devices, and controlled-burning "recombiners" outside  
containment fed by dedicated penetrations.  
Chapter6 159 ( 4) Expanded design criteria to ensure that decay heat re­moval, radwaste, and makeup and purification systems can func­tion under degraded-core conditions.  
(5) Radwaste system design features to aid in post-accident  
recovery and decontamination.  
There can be no mistaking the rulemaking's sweeping scope which,  
according to an anonymous senior NRC staffer, ''will make the ECCS hearings  
[the bitterly contested AEC rulemaking that lasted from mid-1971 to early  
1973]1ook like a Sunday school picnic." 36 The Action Plan estimates that "as  
many as 40 regulatory guides ... may have to be revised to achieve a consistent  
regulatory approach. " 37 Insofar as the entire NRC regulatory structure as­sembled from the late 1960s to the present comprises less than !50 regulatory  
guides, the rulemaking appears capable of massively restructuring current  
regulatory standards.  
Only a few very preliminary cost estimates are available for the equip­ment improvements and new systems that the rulemaking will consider.  
Filtered-vented containments might cost between $10 and $50 million per  
reactor, according to a tentative Action Plan estimate, 38 but NRC cost projec­tions for design changes have usually proven low. Similarly, the nuclear  
industry concedes that its old $3 million estimate for floating-reactor core  
ladles is not applicable today because area and thickness requirements have  
increased. 39 Perhaps most tellingly, the Atomic Industrial Forum (AIF) did not  
estimate hardware costs to mitigate degraded cores in its cost assessment of  
over 50 other TMI-related measures, 40 probably reflecting industry's aversion  
to giving explicit consideration to particularly costly new measures.  
Even speculative cost estimates are scarce because the requirements that  
will emerge from the degraded core rulemaking are unknown. Aside from the  
prospective combative nature of the rulemaking, there are "critical phenome­nological unknowns or uncertainties that impact containment integrity assess­ments and judgments regarding the desirability of certain mitigating fea­tures."41 "Research on degraded cores stopped in 1963,"42 according to the  
senior NRC staffer quoted earlier, because such accidents were outside the  
design basis. As a result, core geometry and motion during and after a  
meltdown are "a major area of uncertainty," and such pivotal issues as  
thermal hydraulics, material motion, heat transfer, and the effects of reactor  
vessel failure "are not well understood. " 43  
NRC's research to provide a rulemaking basis will investigate damaged  
fuel behavior, including hydrogen formation, fuel and clad melting, debris  
formation, and flow blockage; molten core behavior, including its possible  
interactions with reactor coolant, containment fluids, plant structures, and  
soil; and effect of hydrogen explosions on containment. 44 The program is large,  
with approximately 40 research projects costing $15 million in FY -82 alone. 45  
NRC does not anticipate completing these studies until late 1983,46 a schedule  
160 Chapter6 that augurs poorly for expeditiously completing the rulemaking and resolving  
the serious design uncertainties that the degraded core issue poses.d  
The prospects for settling this issue without extensive design and equip­ment changes appear dim. TMI, the Browns Ferry partial scram failure and  
other recent reactor mishaps (Chapter 5), and re-evaluations of earlier accident  
analyses have convinced one ACRS member that "There are many potential  
paths to severe core damage or core melt so that it will be difficult to make the  
frequency of such an accident very much smaller [than about one in a thousand  
per reactor per year] with a high degree of confidence.' ' 
48 The solution, then,  
is not only to take steps to reduce the chances of core-damage accidents but  
also to "provide containment capability, as practical, for a wide spectrum of  
severe accidents as a separate line of defense. " 49  
Improvements in Instrumentation, Control Room, and Emergency Pre­paredness: The demonstration at TMI of the "reality" of core-melt acci­dents is also motivating improvements in reactor instrumentation, control  
room design, and equipment to manage emergency response.  
NRC has acknowledged a need for vastly improved equipment to moni­tor plant systems and variables during and after accidents, including those  
involving degraded cores. 50 A revision of Regulatory Guide (RG) 1.97 await­ing Commission approval will require capability for measuring temperatures,  
pressures, flow rates, water levels, gas concentrations, radioactivity levels,  
and valve positions at hundreds of locations in the reactor core, the reactor  
coolant system, containment systems, steam generators, auxiliary systems,  
and electrical power systems. 51 Most of the instruments will need to be  
qualified for accident conditions, and many will require recording capability to  
aid diagnosis during and after accidents. A minority of the instruments have  
been ordered for 1981 installation, but the schedule for the remainder is still  
pending. NRC's estimate of the total implementation cost is up to $6 million  
per reactor, 52 while industry's is "$6 million with a high probability of  
exceeding $14 million" (slightly less for plants in early construction). 53  
Moreover, RG 1.97 is said to include only minimum requirements for in­strumentation, and more may be added in the future. 5 4  
Control room instruments and designs will also be improved under the  
Action Plan. Equipment for recording vital data, testing control panel lights,  
and regulating control room access, for example, will be upgraded at new  
reactors and at most existing ones. In addition, a Safety Parameter Display  
System will report on important data, such as reactivity control and core  
cooling, to give operators an overview of the plant's safety status. The system  
and improvements are estimated to cost $2-4 million per plant, exclusive of  
implementation of a regulatory guide being prepared to settle the' 'unresolved  
d. Similarly, NRC did not issue the rulemaking notice until October 1980, far behind its  
original, October 1979 objective of publishing it "within a few months. " 47  
Chapter 6 161 safety issue" status pending for control room design. 55  
Simulators will probably be installed at each reactor site, in part to help  
operators increase their proficiency to conform with stiffer NRC require­ments. 56 These extremely complex machines must mimic the plant's entire  
piping, wiring, and control systems, even including the plant computer, and  
must train operators to cope with multiple failure, incorrect instrumentation,  
and failure of safety systems. The Action Plan estimates their cost at up to $6  
million each, 57 but one industry estimate is $9 million, 58 and a recent contract  
indicates a much higher cost.e  
The Action Plan also calls for three new facilities at each plant to support  
emergency operations: managerial and technical staff would diagnose an  
accident and conduct emergency operations from a Technical Support Center  
built to control-room habitability standards and receiving most of the accident·  
parameter information required in RG 1.97; to avert control room crowdin'g,  
support staff would report to an Onsite Operational Support Center for task  
assignments; and emergency functions and radiation measurements would be  
co-ordinated with federal, state and local authorities at an offsite Emergency  
Operations F acUity provided with a duplicate Safety Parameter Display  
System. Industry cost estimates for the combined facilities are $5-11 million  
per site, not including communication systems linking the plant to local  
emergency authorities. 60  
Finally, NRC is considering requiring data links to convey critical  
information, including all instrumentation status stipulated in RG I. 97, to  
NRC's operations center outside Washington. 61 Although industry is bitterly  
contesting this proposal on cost grounds, the widespread mistrust of utility  
capability to handle reactor crises makes it plausible that NRC will require that  
the data links provide comprehensive, on-line information-exchange capabil­ity, at considerable cost.  
Decay Heat Removal and Emergency Core Cooling Systems: There­sidual heat removal (RHR) function removes fission product "decay heat"  
after reactor temperature and pressure have been brought below normal operat­ing conditions, e.g., following a reactor scram. At most plants it shares pumps  
and heat exchangers with parts of the ECCS-an arrangement that is said to  
restrict plant flexibility to arrest certain accidents. 62 The Action Plan commits  
NRC to study the desirability of a dedicated, "bunkered" RHR system inde­pendent of other plant systems. 63 Such a system would require its own services  
and coolant supply, would need to be fully available on demand and immune to  
plant equipment failure, and would be protected against most acts of sabo­tage. 64 Evaluation and promulgation of RHR system requirements are ex­pected to take two to three years. 65 (NRC staff has recommended that RHR  
e. Consumers Power is constructing a $38 million nuclear training center with simulators  
and duplicate control rooms to serve two reactor stations, Palisades and Midland. 59  
162 Chapter6 function be designated an unresolved safety issue.)  
Concern over the RHR system's dependence upon non-safety-qualified  
equipment such as the ECCS precedes the TMI accident. Because RHR  
systems depend on instruments, valves, and logic systems that might be lost  
due to power failure, the system might be unable to function following the  
reactor scram which such a power failure would initiate. Thus, separate from  
the Action Plan, the ACRS has recommended improving the reliability of the  
electrical services supporting the RHR system or providing the self-contained  
system to be studied by NRC. 66 In addition, the desirability of RHR upgrad­ings has been highlighted by several losses of RHR capability at PWRs, most  
seriously at Davis-Besse in 1980.1  
Similarly, TMI has aggravated long-standing concerns over ECCS capa­bility by demonstrating that emergency cooling systems could be required to  
operate under a wider range of pressures and for longer periods of time than  
hitherto assumed. NRC staff is studying ECCS response for possible designa­tion as an unresolved safety issue and is undertaking new studies to reduce  
performance uncertainties under diverse accident conditions.~ Whereas pre­vious research focused on large pipe breaks, assuming, incorrectly, that their  
consequences would necessarily be worse than those of more modestly in­itiated accidents, NRC will now examine small break LOCAs and transients.  
''Small-break LOCA analyses performed by the L WR vendors ... have shown  
that large uncertainties may exist in system thermal-hydraulic response due to  
modeling assumptions or inaccuracies,'' says the Action Plan, and changes in  
analysis methods may be needed that would require modifying operating  
procedures and/or equipment. 69  
Radiation Protection: The TMI Action Plan also commits NRC to  
correct deficiencies that the accident investigations found in the design, equip­ment, and management of radiation protection programs. 70 The degraded-core  
rulemaking and other Action Plan provisions will consider a host of measures  
to reduce the potential for worker exposure and radiation releases during  
accidents and to aid in accident recovery and decontamination: 71 piping and  
instrumentation to detect, vent, and segregate radioactive liquids and gases in  
f. In Aprill980, RHR capability at Davis-Besse was lost for 2\1 hours during refueling  
when power to one RHR train failed while the other was down for maintenance. The containment  
spray system and part of the ECCS were also down for maintenance, and the reactor vessel head  
was detensioned and thus might have failed under high pressure. Reactortemperatures rose from  
90°F to 170°F before the heat removal pump damaged by the power failure could be repaired. 67  
g. A 1980 NRC Bulletin provides an excellent example of the effect of TMI on ECCS  
concerns. It reports Westinghouse·s discovery that failure of the pressurizer relief valve could  
damage the centrifugal charging pumps-a high-pressure addition to the ECCS at recent PWRs­before they could complete coolant injection. Failure of that valve allowing reactor coolant to  
drain out through the pressurizer was a critical malfunction at TMI. and it is fairto sunnise that it  
was instrumental in Westinghouse's discerning the vulnerability of the charging pumps 68  
Chapter6 163 primacy coolant that would collect in containment following some accidents;  
additional, upgraded filters to capture iodine and other radionuclides that  
might be vented to areas outside containment such as the radwaste building or  
the control room; and design features such as hookups for portable decontami­nation systems to facilitate post-accident cleanup.  
Monitoring of radioactivity is also likely to be expanded. The Action  
Plan will consider requiring effluent monitoring for a wider selection of  
radioisotopes and continuous monitoring of isotope concentrations in the  
environment (concentrations are currently measured over three-month periods  
rather than continuously). 72 Monitoring systems may need to be designed to  
accident conditions (environmentally-qualified and equipped for a broad range  
of concentrations) and connected to the control room for continuous data  
transmission. In addition, NRC will develop more stringent performance  
criteria for radiation surveying and monitoring instruments, such as dosimet­ers, to improve worker protection and reduce personnel risks from corrective  
efforts during accidents. 73  
Section 6.3: Effect Of TMI On Quality Assurance And  
Requirements For Safety Equipment  
NRC is undertaking two major initiatives to upgrade the integrity of  
nuclear plant design, equipment, and construction following TMI. One initia­tive will apply quality assurance and other stringent requirements to some  
equipment and systems previously judged not important to safety and thus not  
subject to QA requirements or NRC review. The other will strengthen the  
conduct of QA and expand NRC inspection of equipment design, fabrication,  
and installation.  
Expanding the Safety-Related Classification: As discussed in Section  
6. I, NRC requirements for ensuring a high degree of reliability apply only to  
equipment that the licensee, with NRC approval, deems necessary to prevent  
design basis accidents. Other, "nonsafety" equipment is assumed to neither  
enhance nor interfere with the performance of "safety" equipment during  
accidents. The TMI accident, however, has drawn attention to the fact that  
NRC accident analyses assume performance by a substantial body of nonsafety  
equipment whose design and manufacture are not reviewed by NRC and which  
is not built to withstand accident conditions. This category includes control  
systems, in-core instrumentation, pressurizer relief valves and heaters, level  
instrumentation for the pressurizer, steam generator and refueling water tanks,  
turbine bypass valves, and diesel generator support systems. 74  
NRC's program for expanding the list of safety-related equipment is  
based on its Interim Reliability Evaluation Program (!REP, see Section 6. 1).  
This comprehensive assessment of the potential contribution of each plant  
164 Chap!er6 component and system to accident risks is not scheduled for completion until  
late 1983, however, ensuring that the applicability of requirements for safety­related equipment will be uncertain for at least several years. The target date is  
uncertain, too, because of the many different cooling systems, instrumentation  
and controls, plant power sources, etc., in use and the difficulty of scoping the  
many types of interactions between safety and nonsafety equipment which can  
add to risk (seep. 136).  
Moreover, data deficiencies may severely constrain the entire approach  
of probabilistic risk assessment. Many components whose contribution to risk  
must be assessed do not have well-defined failure rates because they are  
employed rarely or in heterogeneous situations. "There's not enough experi­ence and the character of the input data changes,"" says one ACRS member,  
contrasting the recent occurrence of partial scram failure at Browns Ferry Unit  
3 (p. 144) with the "unrealistically low probability" previously assumed by  
General Electric. 75 Because' 'the scram system was probably the system most  
studied using probabilistic techniques, ... this occurrence must give pause to  
one's acceptance of any claim of high reliability for a particular system, based  
solely on probabilistic analysis," according to another ACRS member. 76  
These methodological limitations are likely to force NRC to take a conserva­tive approach in determining which equipment is important to safety.  
Changing the Conduct and Scope of Quality Assurance: NRC will also  
expand its oversight of nuclear plant design, equipment-manufacture, and  
construction because of TMI. Because deficient design and equipment figured  
heavily in the accident, quality assurance "needs to be strengthened in the  
areas of design methodology and installation conformance with design in­tent," according to the ACRS. 77 The accident closely coincided, moreover,  
with other revelations of shortcomings in nuclear industry design and construc­tion practices and in NRC's oversight, as discussed in Section 5.1.  
NRC's corrective program emphasizes keeping industry audits indepen­dent of design and construction teams, perhaps by requiring that licensees take  
over QA from their architect-engineers (A-Es) and constructors, or even by  
making QA personnel NRC agents. 78 The Commission is also assigning  
inspectors to all construction sites, increasing the extent of actual construction  
monitoring, and initiating trial programs in which it will independently ex­amine construction materials and methods. 79 Activities of reactor vendors and  
A-Es may also come under closer scrutiny; NRC is considering assigning  
resident inspectors to vendor and A-E headquarters80 and is being urged to  
require rigorous QA procedures for probabilistic analyses used in safety­related design. 81 These initiatives will, it is hoped, make for safer plants, but  
h. An example of changing data given by the ACRS member is temperature fluctuations  
affecting valve springs.  
Chapter6 165 they will also add to direct costs, schedule delays, and overall construction  
complexity.  
Section 6.4: Effect OfTMI On Feedback From  
Operating Experience  
All of the Three Mile Island accident investigations roundly criticized  
NRC and the nuclear industry for failing to incorporate information available  
through reactor operating experience into the design and operation of new  
plants. The Kemeny Commission, which studied the accident for the Presi­dent, found that "prior to the accident there was no systematic method of  
evaluating [operating] experiences, and no systematic attempt to look for  
patterns that could serve as a warning of a basic problem.' ' 82 The Rogovin  
Report concluded that "NRC and the industry have done almost nothing to  
evaluate systematically the operation of existing reactors, pinpoint safety  
problems, and eliminate them by requiring changes in design, operator proce­dures, or control logic. " 83 The Rogovin Report called this "an unacceptable  
situation that compromises safety and that cannot be allowed to continue," 84  
while the Kemeny Commission urged that current plants and past experience  
be combed "to assess compliance with current requirements, to assess the  
need to make new requirements retroactive to older plants, and to identify new  
safety issues. " 85  
These stinging criticisms and emphatic recommendations were occa­sioned by the fact that the initial sequences in the TMI accident had happened  
twice before-at a Swiss reactor in 1974, and at Davis-Besse in Ohio (a virtual  
twin of TMI) in 1977. In both instances, and at TMI, instruments misled  
operators into thinking the reactor vessel was full while reactor coolant was  
actually escaping through a stuck-open pressurizer-relief valve. Although the  
first incident involved a Westinghouse reactor, it was not reported to NRC  
because foreign plants do not fall under NRC reporting requirements. The  
Davis-Besse case was intensively studied by the utility, the vendor, and the  
NRC, but no recommendations were developed and no findings were transmit­ted to Metropolitan Edison, the operator of TMI.i To the Kemeny Commis­sion, this illustrated the "lack of 'closure' in the system" that ranked high  
among the deficiencies which "convinced [us] that an accident like Three Mile  
Island was eventually inevitable. " 86  
Remedial action by NRC has included several steps. One was establish­ment in late 1979 of an Office for Analysis and Evaluation of Operational Data  
(AEOD) to collect, analyze, and evaluate operating experience and recom­mend NRC action. Although the extent of the new Office's clout within NRC is  
i. The Rogovin Report (Reference 14) contains the definitive account of the Tlvll pre­cursors -and the failure to heed t!rem (p_ 94ff)_  
!66 Chapter6 not yet clear, it was lauded by the President's Nuclear Safety Oversight  
Committee for its in-depth analysis of the 1980 Browns Ferry partial scram  
failure. 87 Moreover, its recommended response to that accident goes beyond  
NRC's initial actions, 88 and the AEOD director also has insisted that industry­sponsored data groups identify the subject plants of operating reports to NRC,  
even if NRC uses such information punitively) "Trying to operate in a  
semi-secret atmosphere is an old way of doing business that shouldn't per­sist," he was reported as saying. 89 NRC is currently reviewing its require­ments for non-licensee reporting (I 0 CFR 21) and is revising several regula­tory guides governing licensee reporting requirements.  
In addition, the Commission appears to have stepped up licensee notifi­cation of new safety problems surfacing in operating experience or elsewhere  
(e.g., research and testing programs, plant construction). Issuance of safety­problem bulletins and circulars by the Office of Inspection and Enforcement  
has risen by more than 50% since Three Mile Island, from a rate of. 57 bulletins  
and circulars per reactor-year during 1978 and the first quarter of 1979, to .88  
in the 21 months following TMI (April 1979 through December 1980; see  
Figure 5.1 in previous chapter). This dramatic increase probably reflects both  
an unrelated spurt in the occurrence of safety-related problems and a height­ened sensitivity to accidents and to the importance of operational feedback  
after TML In light of the importance of past "lessons learned" in adding to  
regulatory requirements and costs,k continuance of this trend would accelerate  
the rate of increase in regulatory standards and costs.  
Section 6.5: The Safety-Cost Tradeoff After TMI  
Costs are incurred whenever equipment is added or designs are altered to  
reduce accident risks. Neither Congress nor NRC has established a "safety  
goal'' for nuclear power ,I and the Commission has few guidelines for compar­ing equipment costs against safety benefits. Nevertheless, NRC commission­ers and staff are mindful of the potential cost impacts of new regulatory  
requirements, and decisions to strengthen safety requirements are usually  
made with at least an implicit recognition of their possible costs and effects on  
j. The industry groups referred to are the Nuclear Safety Analysis Center and the Institute  
of Nuclear Power Operations, both formed in the aftermath ofTML  
k. The effect of operating experience on regulatory requirements is treated in detail in  
Chapter 3. Despite the lack of past systematic evaluation of operating experience (a qualifying  
term employed by both the Kemeny and Rogovin reports), some evaluation, if haphazard, was  
performed by AEC and NRC and contributed significantly to increased regulatory standards.  
I. NRC has a program to develop a safety goal by the end of 1981. 90 The provisions for  
public participation and the complexity of the issue make it doubtful that the schedule can be met,  
however.  
Chapter6 167 the nuclear industry. Accordingly, NRC's willingness to abide by the cost  
consequences of its regulatory actions can be significant in determining  
whether new regulatory criteria are adopted.  
There is much evidence that the Three Mile Island accident has shifted  
the equilibrium between lower costs and added safety toward the side of  
greater safety. The many new requirements, initiatives, and proposed actions  
in the TMI Action Plan can be taken as signs of a stronger intent to reduce  
accident hazards. Another measure is the increase in safety-related communi­cations to licensees discussed just above. A third is current statements of  
regulatory philosophy; these too give indication that safety concerns now loom  
larger relative to costs than they did prior to TMI.  
What might be termed the "pre-TMI" perspective on balancing costs  
and safety was articulated by AEC Commissioner (later NRC Chairman)  
Anders to Congress in 1974:  
When one speaks of costs, it would be irresponsible not to balance the gain  
from the incremental improvement in safety against the incremental cost of  
this improvement. AEC is particularly concerned about ... the various  
social and environmental costs that could result from a lack ofpower91  
Contrast that statement with then-NRC Chairman Hendrie's remarks to the  
Commission's chief industry adversary on regulatory matters, the Atomic  
Industrial Forum, in late I 979:  
We can and do consider costs in our rulemaking ... butt he improvemem in  
safety . . must be the dominant element in our considerations . .. [W]hen  
we come to ... a specific matter, on a specific plant, costs and related  
factors do not count for much. 92  
The treatment of safety and costs as co-equals has given way to the dictum that  
safety is paramount and costs are secondary.  
A similar change is apparent concerning the related question of which  
party in the reactor safety debate bears the burden of proof. NRC Commis­sioner Gilinsky believes in retrospect that past policy put ''the burden of  
proof ... on the regulators to justify negative findings on safety matters. " 93  
Thus, NRC mandated only "the most conservative requirements consistent  
with the commercial viability of nuclear power,'' according to one account of  
pre-TMI regulation. 94 As the Kemeny Commission concluded, "the NRC has  
sometimes erred on the side of the industry's convenience rather than carrying  
out its primary mission of assuring safety.' ' 95  
The trauma of TMI, however, has "shattered [NRC's] complacency"  
about reactor hazards, says Gilinsky. 96 NRC proclaims itself "in complete  
accord with the [Kemeny Commission's] proposition that there should be a  
presumption in [safety-cost] tradeoffs in favor of safety. " 97 ACRS similarly  
has urged "a fundamental change" in the approach of the architect-engineer  
168 Chapter6 and the licensee "to make the safety of the plant as good as reasonably  
achievable, rather than merely meeting existing regulatory requirements at  
minimum cost. " 98  
Thus, the climate at NRC has changed from one that overtly sought to  
weigh equally the nuclear industry's needs and public safety, to one in which  
safety is said to come first. Although it remains to be seen whether this climate  
has the lasting power to translate into effective action-and to hold up against a  
more energy supply-minded Administration and Congress-the attitudes  
noted here appear deep-rooted and unlikely to fade quickly. The reports of the  
Kemeny Commission, the Rogovin group, and the many other TMI investiga­tions, moreover, have stressed that "NRC can no longer disregard its critics by  
citing the safety record of the industry it regulates. " 99 It is fair to anticipate  
that the post-TMI regulatory programs and initiatives discussed here will be  
pursued more vigorously than their pre-accident counterparts.  
Section 6.6: Effect OfTMI On Construction  
Scheduling And Logistics  
This chapter has demonstrated that the Three Mile Island accident top­pled basic precepts of nuclear safety regulation, tightened surveillance of  
operating experience, tempered NRC's sensitivity to the costs of new regula­tory standards, and stimulated development of an Action Plan that will impose  
significant new design and equipment requirements and substantially upgrade  
the oversight of reactor design and construction. These efforts are in addition  
to ongoing programs that are generating and revising many regulatory guides  
but are registering little success in resolving significant outstanding safety  
issues (Chapter 5).  
Those ongoing programs alone were sufficient to create a regulatory  
logjam and impose considerable capital cost increases, without the accident.  
There is now the prospect that the accident's impact may overwhelm the  
regulatory, manufacturing, and financial machinery necessary to build re­actors, causing cost and schedule increases that could strain the system further  
and make it impossible to bring some plants to completion.  
Regulatory Pressure: NRC has been charged with many difficult man­dates in the wake of TMI. It must establish a comprehensive plan for the  
systematic safety evaluation of all 70 operating reactors 100-a considerable  
broadening of the former Systematic Evaluation Program (SEP) covering only  
the II oldest plants-while improving lessons-integration from plant opera­tions, settling the unresolved safety issues, and carrying out the ambitious TMI  
Action Plan. It must manage these programs, as well as ongoing safety  
research, regulatory guide issuance and revision, etc., with at best only modest  
increases in personnel and in real expenditures.  
Chapter6 169 The effect will be a compounding of regulatory uncertainty, as indicated  
by the 1982-84 resolution targets of most key Action Plan items, by slippage in  
many targets to date (only some of which is due to industry lobbying), 101 and  
by statements from NRC officials. As the director of NRC's Division of  
Systems Safety told the Commissioners in May 1980,  
The flavor you should have from the [Action Plan] is that we did defer into  
1982 a lot of things which were very important to the Kemeny Commission  
and to the Rogovin group, as well as to our own internal review. 102  
One indication of industry's expectations is that Commonwealth Edison will  
wait until ''about 1985'' to decide whether to back fit or retire its old Dresden I  
reactor; "at that time, NRC should have decided just what post-TMI and SEP  
fixes will have to be made on the unit.'' 103  
With NRC's attention focused upon operating plants, new reactors are  
being downgraded in the allocation of regulatory resources: Reviews of con­struction permit applications have been suspended since TMI, pending formu­lation of a licensing policy to apply accident lessons to new plants-a low­priority item compared to safety improvements at existing plants. As NRC's  
Director of Reactor Regulation told ACRS in justifying the suspension, "I  
wish I had the resources to develop new positions. I have enough to do with  
Browns Ferry, St. Lucie, and Crystal River [sites of serious accidents in  
1980]." 10 4 The imbalance between NRC's resources and its responsibilities  
alone would perpetuate considerable licensing instability, even in the absence  
of the new problems which future reactor operations will inevitably generate.  
Vendor Pressure: Some manufacturers that supply and build nuclear  
plants are experiencing difficulty in staying in business because of the acute  
diminution of the reactor business-a phenomenon which predates but has  
been exacerbated by TMI. Although none of the four suppliers of nuclear  
steam systems seems about to fold-indeed, the two leaders, General Electric  
and Westinghouse, boast of the profitability of their repair and service depart­ments-the lack of reactor sales and the dimming of nuclear power's aura as  
the major future energy source are reportedly causing valued technical, en­gineering, and executive personnel to leave the industry. Many equipment  
suppliers are also reported to be withdrawing from the nuclear field, victims of  
"the difficulties [they] face in storing deferred equipment, maintaining their  
nuclear [QA] ratings, and dealing with the paperwork demanded of them by  
regulatory agencies" in a stagnant market. 105  
Shrinkage in the nuclear supply industry could raise reactor costs in  
several ways: by constricting competition and thus raising equipment prices;  
by precipitating equipment shortages which foul construction logistics; by  
dampening the willingness of firms to provide prompt, reliable supply and  
service in order to build long-term customer goodwill; and by reducing the flow  
170 Chapter6 of new talent into the nuclear field. Conversely, shrinking markets usually  
lead, at least temporarily, to falling prices, but this short-term effect is likely to  
be outweighed by the others.  
Financial Pressure: The staggering cost of building new reactors­several billion dollars at least in current dollars-can put severe financial  
pressure on utilities to stretch out construction. (This is apart from the impact  
of regulatory changes on construction schedules, including the merits of  
deferring work while awaiting new requirements.) Such pressure can be  
especially acute when the completion target is far in the future, load growth is  
declining and uncertain, bids for higher electric rates are meeting resistance,  
and reactors are displacing relatively inexpensive coal rather than oil­circumstances which hold for many plants under construction. Moreover,  
continued construction of new reactors increasingly must compete for capital  
with other investments that may permit less flexibility or be more productive:  
construction of coal plants, oil-to-coal conversions, and post-TMI backfits of  
operating reactors.  
Thus, construction schedules for some plants could be stretched out  
intentionally. Some utilities may even have no alternative if they are to  
maintain adequate credit ratings or even to comply with legal interest coverage  
requirements. 106 Although the effects of stretch-outs on plant costs are usually  
expressed in current dollars (unadjusted for inflation) and are grossly over­stated, they do increase real interest costs, disrupt construction logistics, and  
expose plants to additional regulatory requirements. These effects can, in turn,  
foster further stretch-outs, diminish the viability of nuclear suppliers, reduce  
the regulatory priority assigned to new plants, etc., which would raise costs  
again, perpetuating the cycle.  
Although the discussion in this section is admittedly somewhat specula­tive, it is true that reactor construction increasingly requires meshing of many  
financial, manufacturing, and regulatory gears. If momentum continues-lobe  
sapped from the nuclear enterprise, it is not inconceivable that the effort to  
co-ordinate all of the necessary parts could prove too great for some plants in  
progress, and that construction might permanently grind to a halt.m  
m. The nuclear industry, for one, would brush aside this scenario with the argument that  
nuclear power expansion is essential to U.S. energy security and economic prosperity, so that,  
come what may, the means will be provided to complete reactors now being built. Nevertheless,  
nuclear power remains a minor energy source-providing less than ll% of U.S. electricity aod  
under 2% of "end-use" energy in 1979-80 (316% of gross energy supply). While nuclear  
generation has declined since 1978, increased use of coal and improvements in energy efficiency  
have significantly reduced U.S. oil use-by 600,000 barrels per day in the electric utility sector  
alone (a one-third reduction) during 1978-80. 107  
Chapter6 17! References  
I. NRC, TMl-2 Less ns Learned Task Force Final Report, NUREG-0585 (1979), p. 3-5.  
2. NRC, NRC Action Plan Developed as a Result of the TM!-2 Accident, NUREG-0660,  
Vol. I ( 1980), p. ll-1.  
3. Reference I.  
4. See, for example, NRC, Reactor Safery Study, W ASH-1400, NUREG-75/0 14 ( 1975).  
5. Nuclear Engineering International, 24 (No. !0), 42 ( 1979).  
6. Milton Levenson, Testimony before the House Subcommittee on Energy Research and  
Production, 22 May 1979.  
7. W. Kenneth Davis, Testimony before the House of Commons Select Committee on  
Energy, 4 June !980, pp. 13-14.  
8. Russell W, Peterson (Kemeny Commission member), Letter in New York Times, 12  
November 1979.  
9. J.G. Kemeny eta/., Reporr of the President's Commission on the Accident at Three  
Mile Island ( 1979), p. 4.  
10. Reference 9, p. 7.  
II. Science, 206, 796 (1979).  
12. Nucleonics Week, 17 May 1979, p. 3.  
13. DOE, Nuclear Power Regulation, DOE/EIA-0201/10(!980), p. xiv.  
14. This definition is from M. Rogovin et al., Three Mile Island: A Report to the  
Commissioners and to the Public(I980), Vol. I, p. 147.  
15. Reference 14. Emphasis in original.  
16. Federal Register, 45 (No. !93), 65475 (2 October 1980, advance notice of proposed  
NRC rulemaking on degraded cores).  
17. Reference I, p. 3-1.  
18. Reference 14, Vol. 2. p. 496.  
19. NRC, Draft Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement for TMI-2 Decontami­nation and Disposal of Radioactive Wastes, NUREG-0683 ( 1980), p. S-1.  
20. Reference 19.  
21. NRC, TM!-2 Lessons Learned Task Force Status Report and Short-Term Recommen­dations, NUREG-0578 (1979), p. 16.  
22. Reference 14, Vol. l, p. 150.  
23, David Okrent, "New Trends in Safety Design and Analysis," paper presented at  
International Atomic Energy Agency Conference on Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues,  
October 1980, p. I.  
24, Inside N.R.C., 8 October 1979, p. 15.  
25. ACRS, A Review of NRC Regulatory Processes and Functions, NUREG-0642  
( 1980), p. 6-5.  
26. Reference 25.  
172 Chapter6 27. ACRS, Comments on the NRC Safety Research Program Budget, NUREG-0603  
(1979), p. 1-2. Emphasis added.  
28. Reference 2, p. li.C-!.  
29. Reference 2, p. li.C-5.  
30. Reference 14, VoL I, p. 148.  
31. GAO, Three Mile Island: The Most Studied Nuclear Accident in History, EMD-80- 
109 (1980), p. 16.  
32. See, e.g., Reference 25, pp. 6-2 and 6-6 through 6-10.  
33. Reference 2, p. l.F-2.  
34. Reference 2, p. Il-l. Emphasis added.  
35. Reference 16, pp. 65474-65477.  
36. lnsideN.R.C.,28Ju!y !980,p. 7.  
37. Reference 2, p. li.B-12.  
38. Reference 2, p. II.B-!5.  
39. lnsideN.R.C., 3 December 1979, p. 13  
40. Atomic Industrial Porum, "Report to the AlF Policy Committee on Follow-Up To  
The TMI Accident by the Working Group on Action Plan Priorities and Resources" (February  
1980), Appendix A, p. D- I I. The report estimated only the industry-wide cost ($57 .5 million )for  
conceptual designs to mitigate degraded core accidents.  
41. Reference 2, p. II.B-4. Emphasis added.  
42. Reference 36.  
43. Sandia National Laboratories, LWR Safety Research Program Quarterly Report,  
April-June 1980, NUREGICR-!509/2of4 (1980), p. 62.  
44. Reference 2, Task II.B. Emphasis added.  
45. Telephone communication with Robert T. Curtis, Chief, Analytical Advanced Tech­nology Branch, Office of Nuclear Reactor Research, NRC, 8 September 1980. The figures given  
are rough estimates including re-direction and expansion of current research as well as newly  
commissioned work.  
46. Reference2, p. ll.B-7.  
4 7. Reference I.  
48. Reference 23, p. 21. See also pp. 19 and 20.  
49. Reference 23, p. 21. See also pp. 19 and 20.  
50, Reference 2, p. II.F-1.  
5 I. Regulatory Guide I. 97, "Instrumentation to Assess Plant and Environs During and  
Following an Accident," 1975, 1977, and proposed revisions in 1979 and 1980.  
52. Reference 2, p. II.P-6.  
53. Reference 40, Appendix A, p. C-1 I.  
54. Inside N.R.C., 8 September 1980, p. 6.  
Chapter6 173 55. Reference 2, pp. 1.0-8 and 9.  
56. lnsideN.R.C., I I August 1980, p. 6.  
57. Reference 2, p. I.A.2-JO.  
58. lnsideN.R.C., 14July 1980, p. 12.  
59. Wall Street Journal, 10 September 1980.  
60. Reference2,p.III.A.J-JI.  
6 I. NRC, Functional Criteria for Emergency Response Facilities (for comment),  
NUREG-0696 (1980); and Inside N.R.C., 8 September 1980, pp. 5-6, and 3 November 1980,  
p. 7.  
62. See, for example, NRC, "Special Report to Congress Identifying New Unresolved  
Safety Issues,'' SECY -80-325, 9 July 1980, Enclosure I.  
63. Reference 2, Section II.E.3.  
64. ACRS, Review of Licensee Event Reports, 1976-1978, NUREG-0572 (1979), pp.  
3-2, D-5 and D-6.  
65. Inside N.R.C., 16 June 1980, p. 16.  
66. Reference 64.  
67. NRC, Office of Inspection and Enforcement, Information Notice 80-20 and Bulletin  
80-12, and Inside N.R.C., 5 May 1980, pp. 3 and 4.  
68. NRC, Office of Inspection and Enforcement, Bulletin 80-18.  
69. Reference 2, p. II.E.2-4.  
70. Reference 2, p. III-3.  
71. Reference 2, Section III.D.I.  
72. Reference 2, Section III.D.2.  
73. Reference 2, Section Ill.D.3.  
74. Reference 14, Vol. II, p. 46.  
75. lnsideN.R.C.,28July 1980,p. JO,quotingmemberJesseEbersole.  
76. Reference 23, p. II.  
77. Reference 25, p. 5-7.  
78. Reference 2, pp. I.F-2 to I.F-3.  
79. Reference 2, p. II.J.2-J.  
80. lnsideN.R.C., 16June 1980, p. 4.  
81. Reference 23, p. I I.  
82. Reference 9, p. 21. Emphasis in original.  
83. Reference 14, Vol. I, p. 95.  
84. Reference 14, Vol. I, p. 95.  
85. Reference 9, p. 66.  
86. Reference 9, p. II.  
174 Chapter6 87. Nuclear Safety Oversight Comminee, Lener to the President, 26 September 1980,  
p. 4.  
88. NRC. AEOD, "Report on the Browns Ferry 3 Partial Failure to Scram Event on June  
28, 1980," 30 July 1980.  
89. Nucleonics Week, 24 July 1980, p. 6.  
90. NRC, Plan For Developing A Safety Goal, NUREG-0735 { 1980).  
91. Legislative History of the Energy Reorganization Act of /974, VoL III at 3572.  
Emphasis added.  
92. Joseph Hendrie, Speech at the AlF International Conference on Financing Nuclear  
Power, Copenhagen, 24 September 1979. Emphasis added.  
93. Victor Gilinsky, Speech at Brown University, Providence, R.I.. 15 November 1979.  
Emphasis added.  
94. E.S. Rolph, Nuclear Power and The Public Safety (Lexington Books, Lexington,  
MA, 1979)p. 77.  
95. Reference 9, p. 19.  
96. Reference 93.  
97. NRC, NRC Views and Analysis of the Recommendations of the President's Commis­sion on the Accident at Three Mile Island, NUREG-0632 ( 1979), p. A-3.  
98. Reference 25, p. 8-4.  
99. Reference 31, p. 37'.  
100. NRC Authorization Act, FY80, Section 110.  
lO I. See, for example, Inside N.R.C., 22 September 1980, p. 14.  
102. As reported in Nucleonics Week, 5 June 1980, p. 3.  
!03. As reported in Nucleonics Week, 30 October 1980, p. 13.  
104. lnsideN.R.C., 8September !980, p. 8.  
105. Nucleonics Week, 28 August 1980, pp. 1-3.  
106. J. Emshwiller, "Big Financial Problems Hit Electric Utilities; Bankruptcies  
Feared," Wall Street Journal, 2 February 1981, p. !.  
107. Vince Taylor, "Electric Utilities: The Transition From Oil," Testimony before the  
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations of the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign  
Commerce, 9 December 1980, available from Union of Concerned Scientists.  
Chapter6 !75 7  
Regulatory And Design  
Changes At Coal-Fired  
a Power Plants  
The capital costs of coal-fired power plants in the United States increased  
significantly during the 1970s. The statistical analysis of recent plant costs in  
Chapters 9 and lO indicates that the cost to build coal plants increased by an  
average of 68% from the end of 1971 to the end of 1978. This increase was in  
addition to inflation in construction labor and materials, and it assumes that no  
1971-completed plants but all 1978-completed plants have sulfur dioxide  
"scrubbers." Approximately 90% of this real cost increase was spent for  
improvements in pollution control. In return, emissions of criteria pollutants  
(sulfur dioxide, or SOz; particulates; and nitrogen oxides, or NOx) from 1978  
plants average approximately 64% less than those from 1971 plants.  
For plants completed in the late 1980s, advanced control systems avail­able or under development today appear capable of further reducing emissions  
by an average of about 75% below 1978-plant levels. This would require an  
additional 36% average increase in capital costs (in constant dollars). Com­pared to a 1971-completed coal plant, these advanced plants would cost  
approximately !30% more to build (not including construction inflation), but  
their emissions of criteria pollutants would average 91% less, as Table 7.1  
shows.  
These emission improvements are putting coal-burning at least on a par  
environmentally with oil-fired electric generation. Compared to I %-sulfur oil  
- the average oil grade burned by utilities 1 - a typical 1978-completed coal  
plant emits an equal amount of S02, two-thirds less particulates, and slightly  
more NOx. Late-!980s coal plants, with potential emission rates 70% to 80%  
less than a I 978 plant, could be considerably cleaner than typical oil-burning  
and noticeably less polluting than even the cleanest utility oil. (The coal-oil  
comparison is developed fully in Section 7. 3.)  
a. An earlier, shorter version of this chapter was published as an article, "Pollution  
Control Improvements in Coal-Fired Electric Generating Plants: What They Accomplish, What  
They Cost," in Journal of the Air Pollution Control Association, 30 (No.9), 1051-1057  
(September !980).  
176 Chapter? Pollutant  
so,  
Particulates  
NOx  
Average Reduction  
Table 7.1  
Emission Reductions  
By Typical New Coal Plants  
Actual Projected  
1971·78 1978·88 1971-88  
74% 80% 95%  
83% 80% 97%  
35% 69% 80%  
64% 76% 91%  
Section 7.1: Emission Abatement In The 1970s  
Emission Standards: The use of coal to generate electricity increased  
rapidly in the 1960s and 1970s. U.S. coal-fired generating capacity increased  
by 80% from 1961 to 1971, and by another 53% to 1978. The concomitant  
increase in coal-generated emissions from massive new pollution sources,  
such as the Four Corners plant in northern New Mexico, provoked a national  
outcry to improve coal-plant pollution controls. Starting in the mid-to-late  
1960s, some state and local authorities ordered utilities to reduce emissions of  
S02 and particulate matter by switching fuels or installing improved control  
devices. And in 1970 Congress amended the Clean Air Act to create a frame­work for reducing emissions from existing plants and set national standards for  
new plants.  
Th.e New Source Performance Standards (NSPS) promulgated by the  
federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the amendments,  
limited emissions of S02, particulates, and NOx from fossil-fuel plants whose  
construction started after August 1971. The NSPS required that new coal  
plants emit 55% fewer pollutants per unit of fuel burned, on average, than  
plants installed in 1971 . Some new plants have surpassed the NSPS levels, as  
Figure 7.2 on page 190 shows, as a result of stricter local regulations, state  
limits to satisfy national ambient air quality standards, or utility efforts to keep  
ahead of regulations. Actual emission rates for coal plants completed in 1978  
thus average approximately 64% less than for their 1971 counterparts, as  
shown in Table 7. 1.  
Emission Abatement Costs: The average capital cost of coal plants  
increased from $346 per kilowatt (kW) of capacity for late-1971 completion to  
Chapter7 177 $583/kW for late-1978 plants, as Table 10.1 demonstrates. (These and all cost  
figures here are in constant mid-1979 ''steam-plant dollars,'' that is, they have  
been adjusted to reflect 1979 prices of construction labor, materials, and  
equipment. They assume, moreover, that 1978 plants include scrubbers to  
remove 802, although about half of recent coal plants lack scrubbers, em­ploying low-sulfur coal instead to comply with the NSPS. They also include  
interest during construction (IDC) in constant dollars, accounting for 8% of  
total costs.) Approximately 90% of the increase, or $210-215/kW, was ac­counted for by pollution control systems.  
Sulfur Dioxide: The highest cost item added to coal plants during  
1971-78 was the 802 scrubber. Fifteen plants in the 116-p1ant study sample  
have scrubbers, designed to remove an average of74% of the S02 emitted from  
the boiler, or 3. 7 lb of S02 per million Btu offuel burned, based on the 2.3%  
average sulfur content of the coal used (see Table 9.4). This is sufficient to  
reduce emissions below the I. 2 lb NSPS limit. The scrubbers are "first­generation" devices using lime or limestone slurries that produce sludge waste.  
The scrubber-equipped plants had a 26% higher average cost (controlling  
for chronology, location, and multi-unit siting) than the 101 non-scrubber  
plants in the sample (Table 9.1 ). Based on the $583/kW average cost of a 1978  
coal plant with a scrubber (in 1979 steam~ plant dollars, shown in Table 10.1),  
the average scrubber cost was $120/kW, including sludge handling and dispo­sal systems. This is identical to EPA's 1979 cost estimate for an equivalent  
scrubber, but is 35% below the estimate in a 1977 study of coal plant costs by  
the Bechtel Corporation for the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI). 2  
Particulates: Although SOz control has dominated most discussions of  
coal pollution control, utilities achieved greater proportional reductions in  
particulate emission rates from 1971 to I 978 for new plants. These reductions  
averaged 83% while SOz emission rates fell74%.  
Particulates from coal-fired boilers have traditionally been controlled by  
electrostatic precipitators (ESPs). Typical 1971 plants were equipped with  
97%-efficient ESPs costing roughly $20/kW. By the end of 1978, ESP effi~  
ciencies averaged 99.5%, costing $35/kW for conventional high-sulfur coal  
and $85/kW for low-sulfur coaJ.3 The latter coal produces highly resistive  
particulates requiring a much larger ESP collection area and stronger electro­static field. The average 1978 ESP cost of $60/kW is half the cost of a typical  
first-generation scrubber.  
The components of the 200% average real cost increase for ESPs during  
1971-78 were approximately as follows:  
!78  
• 130% increase for efficiency improvements from 97% to 99.5%  
for a specific coal grade;  
• I 0% increase for greater collection area needed for lower-sulfur  
Chapter? coal (average new-plant coal sulfur content fell 25-30% from  
1971 to 1978);  
• 5-10% increase for greater collection area to provide higher  
collection reliability.  
(Note: cost increases are multiplicative, not additive.)  
Nitrogen Oxides: The average 1978 coal plant emits NOx at a 35%  
lower rate than its 1971 counterpart- the smallest reduction among the three  
criteria pollutants. This has been achieved by replacing horizontal or vertical  
burner locations with tangential firing, and by boiler modifications to enable  
boilers to be fired with ''low excess air'' and in two combustion stages.  
These modifications reduce combustion temperatures, thereby reducing  
formation of NOx. But without corrective measures they tend to corrode  
furnace walls and increase forrnation of "slag"-solidified molten ash- on  
boiler tubes, leading to combustion control problems and boiler tube leaks.  
Many new coal boilers thus have more sophisticated combustion monitors and  
controls - metered orifices and finely tuned nozzles to enhance air-fuel  
mixing- and wider spacing between boiler tubes to reduce slagging. Others  
enlarge the combustion volume and employ more-widely spaced burners to  
achieve lower temperatures which inhibit NO, formation. These design  
changes added an average of$10/kW to capital costs for 1978 plants.  
Other Environmental Measures: The criteria air pollutants were not  
the only targets of increased pollution controls in the 1970s. Other areas of  
expenditures were noise attenuation measures, $10/kW; pollution abatement  
during plant construction, $5/kW; liquid waste systems to treat norrnal plant  
waste drains for plant re-use or external discharge, $10/kW; improved ash  
disposal, $5/kW ("fixation" and ponding of scrubber sludge are included in  
the scrubber cost); air pollution monitoring systems, $2/kW; and preparation  
of environmental reports to state and federal agencies, $3/kW. 4 Increasing  
usage of cooling towers added an average of $5/kW, and recent plants incurred  
an average $1 0/kW cost for boiler improvements to accommodate variations in  
coal grade caused by mine-safety rules- another environment-related capital  
cost. The combined cost of the above "miscellaneous" pollution-control  
improvements for a typical1978 plant was $50/kW, vs. only $5-10/kW for the  
same measures in 1971.  
Total Costs: As Table 7. 2 shows, environmental concerns absorbed an  
average of $240/kW in capital costs for 1978 coal plants, an increase of  
$210-215/kW above the corresponding expeditures in 1971. This increase  
equals 90% of the actual average 1971-78 increase of $237/kW in the real  
capital costs of typical coal plants reported in Chapter 10 (Table 10.1). Much  
of the $25/kW difference was spent on equipment to improve perforrnance  
reliability: larger, more durable coal pulverizers, control systems for load­Chapter? 179 Pollutant  
Particulates  
so,  
NO,  
Solid Waste  
Other  
TOTAL  
INCREASE  
Table 7.2  
Pollution Control Costs  
For New Coal Plants  
(in mid-1979 steam-plant $/kW)*  
Actual  
1971 1978  
20 60  
120  
10  
0-5 5  
45  
25-30 240  
210-215 120-230  
*Costs include IDC accounting for 8% of total costs.  
Projected  
1988  
65-80  
140-180  
60-90  
30-45  
65-75  
360-470  
cycling operation (increasingly needed because of reduced load growth and/or  
expanded nuclear capacity), increased design margins, improved quality  
control, and larger stocks of spare parts. The remainder of the cost increase not  
accounted for by environmental equipment is attributable to increased IDC as  
real interest costs rose and construction durations lengthened (Table 10.4).  
Section 7.2: Emission Abatement In Tbe 1980s  
Emission Standards: A revised set of New Source Performance Stan­dards, approximately twice as stringent as the original NSPS, was promul­gated by EPA in 1979 pursuant to the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977. The  
new NSPS, shown in Figure 7.2, pertain to plants that commenced construc­tion after September 18, 1978. They will affect some plants coming into  
service as early as 1983 and most plants completed in 1985 or thereafter.  
The 1977 Amendments also require that new utility and industrial plants  
built in or near designated pristine ("prevention of significant deterioration"  
or PSD) areas or polluted ("nonattainment") areas install the "best available  
control technology" or achieve the "lowest achievable emission rate," re­spectively. These guidelines are defined, ambiguously, as the maximum re­180 Chapter? duct ion possible for each pollutant, taking into account energy, environmen­tal, and economic impacts. They are intended to be "technology-forcing,"  
i.e .. to push the utility industry to develop improved controls surpassing the  
new NSPS. EPA will determine the actual reductions required through case­by-case ''new source reviews'' in its permitting process.  
The new NSPS will thus serve as a floor, rather than a ceiling, for  
pollution control practice for many new coal plants. Since over half of the  
country either is in a PSD or nonattainment area, or will affect such areas  
through airborne transport of pollutants, a majority of new plants may be  
required to better the NSPS. Some utilities may opt for stricter controls in any  
event to avert drawn-out negotiations with EPA. The NSPS are also subject to  
further strengthening as coal-fired generating capacity continues to expand.  
Although growth in sales of electricity has fallen since 1973 to less than half  
the historical 7% annual rate,b the prohibition of new oil- or gas-fired genera­tors and the worsening prospects for nuclear power virtually ensure growth in  
coal-burning capacity in the 1980s and 1990s.  
Emission Abatement Costs: In estimating the additional costs of pollu­tion controls beyond those employed by 1978 coal plants, emission rates for  
1988 plants have been assumed to be one-third of those dictated by the NSPS.  
This will ensure that the additional cost of new control improvements is not  
underestimated. The cost is estimated to be approximately $!90/kW, almost  
equal to the cost of the controls added between 1971 and 1978.  
Sulfur Dioxide: The new NSPS replace the former 1.2 lb/106 Btu  
standard with a set of limits varying with coal sulfur content, as shown in Table  
7.3. Ninety percent S02 removal is required except when emissions fall below  
.6 !b; below that mark, only 70% reduction is needed. Any SOz removed by  
pre-combustion coal cleaning or in bottom ash or fly ash (typically 5%) is  
credited as a reduction.  
Average 2%-sulfur coal requires an 84% SOz reduction (coal with a  
heating value below 11,000 Btu/lb requires a greater reduction, and vice  
versa). But since sulfur content varies among coal shipments, a higher design  
efficiency, perhaps as high as 90%, is needed to meet the 30-day continuous  
averaging requirement when coal sulfur content averages 2%.  
The 15 scrubbers in the study data base averaged $120/kW in cost and  
74% design removal efficiency. Studies for EPA suggest that raising S02  
removal efficiency from 74% to 90% increases scrubber costs by only 1-116:%,  
or $1-2/kW. 5 This figure appears questionable, however. More efficient  
scrubbers must circulate more liquid to ensure that the S02 is contacted by the  
scrubber chemical reagent, requiring larger pumps and more piping. Lime­b. Utility sales of electricity in 1980 were 22\1;% higher than in 1973, implying a  
compound average annual growth rate just under 3%.  
Chapter 7 181 Sulfur  
Content,%  
3.3-6.6  
l.l-3.3  
Below !.1  
Table7.3  
S02 Reductions Required  
Under New NSPS  
(assumes 11 ,000 Btu/lb coal)  
Sulfur Content  
_.Q!'JW Btu) SOz Reduction  
3.0-6.0 90%  
1.0-3.0 70-90%  
Below !.0 70%  
Note: S02 produced has twice the weight of S in coal.  
so, Emissions  
(lb/10' Btu)  
0.6-1.2  
0.6  
Below0.6  
stone feed and sludge handling systems also expand proportionally with the  
amount of S02 removed. Additional scrubber modules may be required to back  
up malfunctioning modules'. In addition, design improvements may be needed  
to eliminate the corrosion, scaling, and plugging that have affected many  
scrubbers to date. An additional $20-30/kW beyond the $120/kW cost of a  
typical 1978 scrubber appears sufficient to ensure reliable 90% collection by  
the lime or limestone slurry scrubbers employed to date.<  
Newer scrubber designs should achieve even higher S02 removal effici­encies and also dispense with the hard-to-handle sludge that lime and lime­stone scrubbers generate in large quantities. The Chiyoda, Wellman-Lord, and  
magnesia slurry processes are all operating successfully in either commercial  
or pilot applications in the United States and thus are now or will shortly be  
available for commercial ordering. They produce gypsum or elemental sulfur,  
both of which are physically stable and saleable, e.g., for cement or wallboard  
manufacture. Their projected costs are $155-170/kW for high-sulfur coal and  
$120/kW for low-sulfur coal, according to EPRI. 8 Although these estimates  
c. A recent Bechtel study for EPRI estimates capital costs of approximately S 140/kW and  
$150/kW, respectively, for 85%-efficient limestone and lime slurry scrubbers operating with  
high-sulfur (4%) coal. 6 The study estimates much lower costs, S 105/kW and $110/kW, for very  
low-sulfur coal. The estimates include a very generous allowance- 27% of total costs without  
!DC-for general facilities, engineering, and contingency.  
Another EPRI study' estimates that raising limestone slurry removal efficiency from 84%  
to 93% requires an 18% capital cost increase. This suggests that improving the so, collection rate  
from 85% to 90% would add only 10% to costs, an increase within the margins used here to  
project a $140-150/kW cost for 90%-efficient scrubbers burning average-sulfur coal.  
182 Chapter7 assume compliance with only an 85%-removal standard, the processes are  
considered capable of 95% removal for a modestly higher cost, estimated here  
at $140-180/kW. 9  
Scrubbing costs may eventually fall considerably if another scrubbing  
process now under development can be applied on a large scale, In the dry  
sorbent injection process, a fine-mist alkaline slurry converts SOz into a  
sulfite/sulfate mixture which is dried to a powder by the heat of the flue gas.  
The gas then passes through a baghouse filter (see discussion below) which  
collects the dry product along with particulate matter.  
EPRI' s cost estimates for 85%-efficient sorbent injection are only $1 I 5/  
kW for high-sulfur coal and an astonishingly low $41/kW for low-sulfur coal  
(exclusive of the baghouse). 10 All of the major equipment items are com­mercially available, 11 but the process has been tested only with low-sulfur  
coal, so that the EPRI estimates for scrubbing high-sulfur coal are very  
preliminary. Several major scrubber installations using dry sorbent injection in  
conjunction with baghouses or ESPs are being built, however: a I GO-megawatt  
(MW) retrofit in Minnesota starting up in early 1981, and two new 500-MW­class units in North Dakota scheduled for 1981 and 1983, all using low-sulfur  
coal. 12 The 1983 installation, at Basin Electric's Laramie River 3 unit, is  
anticipated to cost only $79/kW for both the scrubber and ESP and to consume  
less than one-half of I% of the unit's total power output while removing  
85-90% of the SOz and at least 99% ofthb particulates. 13  
Particulates: The new NSPS reduce allowable emissions of particu­lates from . I to , 03 lb/ I 06 Btu of fuel input. The corresponding increase in the  
collection efficiency required for an average coal grade ( 14% ash, I l ,000  
Btu/lb) is from 99 .I% to 99. 7%. Electrostatic precipitators at new 1978 plants  
were already averaging 99.5% design efficiencies, with 99.7% at many plants.  
An average emission rate of .01 lb/106 Btu is assumed here. requiring  
99.9% collection efficiencies. Although an improvement from 99.5% to  
99.9% control may appearto have limited value, it would substantially reduce  
emissions of fine particulates, the most difficult to capture under current  
practice. 14 Fine particulates are especially injurious because they more easily  
bypass the lung's defenses, are the principal carriers of trace metals in coal  
ash, including toxic compounds containing lead, cadmium. and arsenic, and  
act as a conduit into the lungs for other air pollutants. They also contribute to  
the reduction of visibility by scattering visible light- a particular concern in  
PSD areas.  
If the higher efficiencies are attained with electrostatic precipitators, the  
increase from 99.5% to 99.9% collection would almost double particulate  
control costs, from $35/kW to $65/kW for high-sulfur coal and from $85/kW  
to $160/kW for low-sulfur coal. 15 However, 99.9% efficiency can almost  
certainly be provided far more cheaply for low-sulfur coal by baghouses  
(fabric filters). This veteran particulate control device in cement- and steel­Chapter? 183 making employs numerous suspended filter bags to trap particulates from flue  
gases, much like d)mmon vacuum-cleaners. It is now being applied to utility  
boilers with the advent of synthetic fibers (primarily fiberglas) that can with­stand combustion gases from coal.  
Although utility use of baghouses is a relatively new phenomenon,d the  
device is being scaled up effectively and is rapidly becoming the favored  
particulate control method for low-sulfur coal. Baghouse emission rates aver­aged .02 lb/106 Btu, corresponding to 99.8% particulate control, at a half­dozen small (10-44 MW of electricity or non-electric equivalent) coal-fired  
boilers tested in the mid- and late l970sY Scaling up is simple because  
baghouses are built in modules. Southwestern Public Service Co. has success­fully operated a baghouse with 28 12'h-MW modules at its new 350-MW  
Harrington 2 unit since 1978, 18 and TVA reports an emission level of only  
.009 lb/106 Btu, or 99.9% control, for the first five units retrofitted with  
baghouses at its Shawnee plant. 19 All ten 175-MW Shawnee units will have  
baghouses by the end of 198 J, and at Four Comers 4 and 5, twin 800-MW units  
in New Mexico whose massive particulate emissions sparked national concern  
at the start of the 1970s; 98%-efficient electrostatic precipitators are being  
replaced by high-efficiency baghouses.  
Baghouses should cost approximately $54/kW for low-sulfur coal and  
$48/kW for high-sulfur, according to EPA. 20 (Baghouse cost and perfor­mance efficiency are primarily a function of the fabric used and vary only  
slightly with coal type.) These costs apply to baghouses guaranteed to meet the  
new NSPS .03 lb standard, but based on TVA's experience, such devices may  
average .0 I lb in actual operation. TVA's low-sulfur baghouses are costing  
only $40/kW, 21 but anticipated bag replacement at approximately four-year  
intervals will add roughly $10/kW (1979 dollars) over a 30-year life. More­over, because of the embryonic status of baghouses for full-size boilers,  
utilities may specify more conservative design and construction to guarantee  
.0 I lb emission rates. Hence, 25 to 50% is added here to EPA's figures, giving  
baghouse costs of $60-72/kW and $68-80/kW for high- and low-sulfur coal,  
respectively.  
The high-sulfur cost is comparable to the $65/k W estimate for an equiva­lent 99. 9%-efficient ESP. But for low-sulfur coal, a baghouse will clearly cost  
Jess than the $!60/kW cost of a 99. 9%-efficient ESP. (Indeed, for low-sulfur  
coal the cost of a baghouse appears equal to that of a 99 .3%-efficient ESP.)  
d. The technology is no1 completely new, however. Southern California Edison success­fully operated a baghouse at its Alamitos plant in 1967-68 but tenninated operation when it  
converted from oil-firing to particulate-free natural gas. The author and his colleagues at the  
Council on Economic Priorities strongly urged consideration of baghouses in I heir 1972 study of  
power plant pollution control. 16  
e. The worst particulate offenders at Four Corners were the first three smaller units,  
which.operated from 1963-64 with only 78%-efficient "mechanical collectors" until they were  
replaced in 1972 by 99%-efficient wet particulate scrubbers.  
184 Chapter7 Averaging the two coal types, 99.9% particulate control for a 1988 coal plant  
should cost from $65/kW to $80/kW, or $5/kW to $20/kW more than the  
$60/kW average for a 1978 plant. In this instance, a new control technology is  
significantly reducing the rate of cost increase for improved pollution control.  
Nitrogen Oxides: The new NSPS reduce the former NOx limit of . 7  
lb/ I 06 Btu to . 6 lb for bituminous coal and .5 lb for subbituminous coal. These  
levels can be achieved through further application of staged combustion and  
low excess furnace air which, in conjunction with tangentially-fired burner  
design, have enabled recent plants to meet the . 7 lb limit.  
The only cost associated with this modest NOx reduction would be  
approximately $5-IO/kW for additional design modifications to prevent the  
changed combustion practices from corroding boiler tubes, and for monitoring  
and control systems to maintain combustion parameters within the requisite  
narrow range. Although EPA contends that boilers can be operated within the  
.5-.6 limit without tube damage, utilities are likely to incorporate preventive  
design features.  
The new NOx standard appears to be the minimum average level achiev­able through combustion modification with present boiler technology. This  
would explain why the new NSPS require only a45% average reduction in NOx  
emissions compared to 1971 plants, versus 91% for particulates and 84% for  
S02. Lenient treatment of NOx may end, however, as coal use expands and  
pressure builds to reduce the conversion by sunlight of NOx and hydrocarbons  
into smog in oxidant nonattainment areas. An emission rate around . 2 lb/  
I 06 Btu for new plants may be necessary to keep utility NOx emissions  
constant to the end of the century ,r and EPA is considering promulgating such  
a standard in the 1980s.  
Reducing NOx emissions below the new .5-.6 lb standard will require  
further changes in furnace design and perhaps NOx flue gas treatment. Two  
new furnace designs, the distributed-mixing burner, which EPA is funding,  
and Babcock & Wilcox's primary combustion furnace, cosponsored by EPRI,  
have achieved emission rates under .2 lb in pilot testing without reducing  
efficiency or corroding boiler surfaces. 23 Both operate by staging combus­tion, first in a water-cooled, low-oxygen environment designed to retard  
corrosion and inhibit oxidation of nitrogen present in coal, and second in an  
oxygen-rich environment where carbon combustion can be completed. Costs  
have not been estimated but should not exceed $20-30/kW (relative to uncon­trolled 1971 plants), since essentially modifications rather than new systems  
are involved.  
Ultimately, however, flue gas treatment of NOx will probably be re­quired, either if the new furnace designs prove inadequate or to reduce emis­f. EPRI has calculated that utility NO, emissions will rise by 60% between !979 and 2000  
even if a .2 lb standard takes effect in !98522 The projection assumes 6% annual growth in  
fossil-electric generation, however, twice the post-1973 growth rate for all U.S. electricity.  
Chapter? 185 sions well below .2lb. The latter could be required at some new plants in PSD  
or nonattainment areas in the 1980s, providing an inroad for applying the new  
technology at all future plants.  
The most advanced NOx treatment processes are "dry" systems using  
gaseous ammonia to convert NOx to hartnless molecular nitrogen. These  
selective catalytic reduction (SCR) processes are operating successfully at  
numerous oil-fired boilers in Japan, and, since early 1980, at a 175-MW  
coal-fired plant there. Although these installations were designed to remove  
only 50% of NOx, reductions of 80%, to about .2lb per million Btu, are said to  
be achievable by employing more catalyst.  
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, which developed the system and has  
licensed Combustion Engineering to build and market it in the United States,  
estimates an installed cost of only $30/kW for 80% removal. 24 The effective  
cost will be several times greater, however, if the expensive titanium and  
vanadium catalyst must be replaced annually, as at present. An EPRI-spon­sored study estimates that coal-fired SCR systems achieving NOx emission  
rates of . 05-. 1 lb will cost $40-90/kW. 25 The lower cost would apply if new  
furnace designs produce low emissions with partial treatment. Adding the  
estimated $20-30/kW cost of furnace changes to the low end of the range, the  
cost to reduce NOx emissions to .2 lb or below is projected here to fall in a  
$60-90/kW range.  
Other Environmental Measure-s: New coal-fired plants are subject not  
only to stricter air pollution standards but also to regulations governing solid  
and liquid waste, noise, and construction effluent. Regulations in these areas  
added approximately $30-35/kW (1979 dollars) to the average cost to con­struct coal plants from I 971 to 1978 and will cause further cost increases in the  
1980s.  
Utility solid waste- fly ash, bottom ash, and scrubber sludge- came  
under federal regulation with the 1976 Resource Conservation and Recovery  
Act (RCRA). Compliance will require lining holding ponds for scrubber  
sludge and ash, at costs estimated by Ebasco Services of approximately  
$30/kW and $5/kW, respectively.26 The fonner cost could be reduced  
through the use of regenerable scrubbers which recycle waste products, as was  
assumed in projecting scrubber costs above. Conversely, costs could rise if ash  
and sludge are designated as hazardous wastes under the RCRA regulations to  
be promulgated in the early 1980s. Impenneable liners would be required to  
curb leaching of trace metals, and disposal could be limited to special geo­logical fortnations which might lie far from the plant site. Balancing these  
considerations, a cost estimate of $30-45/kW for improved waste disposal  
appears reasonable, although costs could be lower or higher than this range.  
Other concerns which contributed to 1971-78 cost increases will also add  
to the costs of late-!980s plants. More complete treatment of waste-water will  
be needed to reduce effluent discharged in conjunction with ash sluicing, boiler  
186 Chapter? cleaning, feedwater and scrubber makeup, and general plant usage to zero or  
near-zero levels. Local regulators may increasingly apply EPA noise attenua­tion guidelines set under the Federal Noise Control Act, adding to costs of  
pulverizers, fans, and other noisy plant machinery. Other issues such as  
construction pollution, effluent monitoring, and fugitive emissions from coal  
piles may also precipitate increased requirements. Based on a literature  
review, the cost of these ''miscellaneous'' environmental protection measures  
could double from 1978 to 1988, contributing an additional $30-40/kW for a  
total of $65-7 5 /k W .8  
Another potential source of major costs is the use of dry cooling to reduce  
the water loss associated with wet cooling towers. Dry towers would be  
extremely expensive, perhaps in a range of $140-185/kW (assuming success­ful development of an ammonia phase tower and including $10-30/kW to  
replace the generating capacity consumed by the towers during hot, peak  
periods). 27 Nevertheless, they could eventually be required in the water-short  
West if steam-electric power plants proliferate there. This would exemplify a  
cost that is incurred because expansion of the number of facilities encounters a  
resource constraint.  
Total Costs: The total increase in the capital costs of environmental  
controls estimated above for a typical 1988 coal plant, compared to 1978  
practice, ranges from $120/kW to $230/kW. The range reflects substantial  
conservatism in both the individual cost estimates and the projected emission  
targets, which are three times as stringent as the new NSPS. Moreover, the  
long lead times of most regulatory standards for coal plants make it unlikely  
that regulations not anticipated here will significantly affect the costs of  
late-1980s plants. Nevertheless, using past experience as a guide, actual costs  
are more likely to be at the upper than the lower part of the range. For purposes  
of cost comparison, a single figure of $190/kW is used here to project the  
average cost of 1978-88 control improvements.  
This amount would be only slightly less than the actual $210-215/kW  
average cost of coal pollution control improvements from 1971 to 1978. The  
major sources of that increase were the first-generation scrubber (a cost  
actually shared by the 1971 ~ 78 and 1978-88 periods but assigned here to the  
prior period) and a high-efficiency electrostatic precipitator. The biggest new  
cost anticipated for 1978 is for improved NO. control, with lesser increases for  
regenerable scrubbers and solid waste management. Despite the marked,  
further reductions in S02 and particulate emission rates projected here for  
late-1980s plants, the necessary cost increases are likely to be limited by the  
advent of new control devices, such as baghouses, which are more expensive  
than current systems at today's control levels but appear less expensive at very  
g. The 1978 base cost of $35/kW for "other measures" that was doubled to estimate 1988  
costs excludes $10/kW for increased boiler tlexibility to accommodate varying coal grades.  
Chapter? 187 high efficiencies.  
Finally, an additional $20/kW is likely to be added to the cost of typical  
late-1980s plants to pay for improved operating reliability and for higher  
''real'' interest costs as construction periods lengthen. The projected pollution  
control improvements would then account for 90% of the estimated cost  
increases (aside from construction inflation) in coal plant capital costs from  
1978 to 1988- equalling the 1971-78 percentage. The 1988 coal plant would  
be 36% more expensive (in real terms) but 76% less polluting than a I 978  
plant, and 129% costlier but 9 I% less polluting than its 197 I counterpart, with  
pollution equipment responsible for nine-tenths of the increased real costs  
(Figure 7 .1).  
Under these circumstances, the two periods, 1971-78 and I 978-88,  
would show the same percentage increase in coal plant capital costs relative to  
expansion of coal-fired generating capacity .h This result would be consistent  
with the hypothesis pursued here that sector expansion plays a key role in  
engendering more stringent environmental and safety standards at coal and  
nuclear plants.  
Section 7.3: Emissions Comparison With Oil  
Very few oil-fired boilers in the United States are equipped with pollu­tion controls. 28 Emissions from oil-firing are limited, if at all, only through  
use of "sweet" low-sulfur oil which produces not only less S02 but also Jess  
particulate matter than high-sulfur oil. The lack of further controls reflects  
society's preoccupation with coal-generated emissions. Compared to uncon­trolled coal combustion, oil-burning produces approximately one-third Jess  
S02 for the same sulfur content (moreover, oil's average sulfur content is  
one-half of coal's), one-third Jess NOx, and 99% Jess particulates.  
With modern control devices, however, emissions from new coal plants  
are comparable with those from oil-burning. Figure 7.2 shows average emis­sions for five generations of coal-fired plants - new I 97 I plants, I 976-77  
plants meeting the original New Source Performance Standards, 1978 plants,  
1983-84 plants meeting the new NSPS, and 1988 plants- while Figure 7.3  
shows average emissions for high-sulfur oil, average-sulfur oil, and low-sulfur  
oil. The typical 1978 coal plant is cleaner than a plant burning the average oil  
( 1 %-sulfur content) now in use, producing roughly equal amounts of S02 and  
NOx and two-thirds Jess particulate matter.  
The same 1978 coal plant suffers in comparison with the low-sulfur  
(. 3%) oil used in New York City and several other populous areas, generating  
h. Installed coal-fired capacity increased 53% during 1971-78 and is projected in Chapter  
10 to increase approximately 60% during 1978-88. The respective average real capital cost  
in'creases are 33% (actual) and 36% (estimated), not counting scrubbers- a cost increase that  
could reasonably be apportioned equally to the two periods.  
188 Chapter? Figure 7.1  
Coal Plant Capital Costs  
(in mid-1979 steam-plant $/k W)  
346  
25- 30JZn,Zi;~  
Year Completed 1971 1978  
Shaded areas indicate environmental protection costs.  
1988  
(projected)  
slightly more particulates and NOx and three times as much S02. Under the  
new NSPS, however, coal plants entering service in the early- to mid-J980s  
will be considerably cleaner than typical oil-firing and will almost match  
low-sulfur oil, with approximately twice as much S02 but one-third less  
particulate matter and slightly less NOx. By 1988, new coal plants could be  
considerably cleaner than even low-sulfur oil in all three pollutant categories,  
as Figures 7.2 and 7.3 show.  
These data have important implications for efforts to reconcile oil-reduc­tion goals and environmental concerns in the electric power sector. They  
indicate that, with current technology (for meeting the new NSPS), new  
coal-fired plants can replace typical oil-burning plants and improve air quality.;  
i. Emissions of toxic trace elements from coal could offset this conclusion. however. Although  
advanced particulate controls collect trace-metal paniculates at high efficiency (baghouses are as  
Chapter? 189 Figure7.2  
Emissions Of Criteria Air Pollutants  
By New Coal Plants  
(lb pollutant/106 Btu of coal burned)  
Original NSPS j£.l.=£..£j  
New 1978 plant 17777771  
1988 plant (projected) .2  
.01  
S02 Particulates  
Pollutants not drawn to same scale. 1971 figures are based upon Reference 16 and  
assume 11.000 Btu/lb coal, 14% ash, 2.2% sulfur, dry bottom boiler, and 97%  
particulate collection. 1978 figures assume 99.5% particulate collection and 74%  
so, collection. 1988 projections assume 99.9% particulate collection, 95% so,  
collection, and 80% NO, reduction.  
Moreover, if currently available 90%-efficient scrubbers and 99.8-99.9%- 
efficient baghouses are employed, new coal plants could operate more cleanly  
than plants burning even low-sulfur oil. (Applying these controls to the typical  
coal in Figure 7.2 would yield emission rates per 106 Btu of .2-.251b S02 and  
.OJ-.02lb particulates.)  
efficient with small particles as with large), several metals in coal such as mercury may vaporize  
in combustion and bypass controls. Oil also contains trace metals, including vanadium, but in  
lesser quantities. So-called hazardous emissions from coal and oil combustion are currently being  
measured and studied by EPA.  
190 Chapter7 Figure 7.3  
Emissions Of Criteria Air Pollutants  
From Current Oil Burning  
(lb pollutant/ I 06 Btu of oil burned)  
New 1971 Coal Plant 3.6 .33 1.0  
(included for comparison)  
Average-Sulfur Oi' 1.1  
( 1% sulfur)  
Particulates NOp:  
Pollutants drawn to same scales as Figure 7.2. All figures calculated from EPA,  
Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors, AP-42, Part B ( !977).  
Heating value of 6.2 million Btu/bbl oil is assumed. NO, emissions vary with  
boiler design, not sulfur content, and assume 30% are tangentially-fired with  
remainder conventionally fired.  
The data also imply that large-scale replacement of nuclear capacity with  
coa:I-fired generation need not add greatly to pollutant emissions. Assuming  
that new coal plants meet the 1988 emission targets discussed here, replace­ment of all 65,000 MW of planned nuclear capacity less than 40% complete  
would add only approximately I% to I 979 nationwide emissions of S02, 3-4%  
to NOx, and under .2% to particulates. The total S02 increment would be less  
than current emissions from a single l ,500-MW coal-fired plant in Ohio whose  
construction predated federal emission standards. The percentage additions  
would be approximately three times as great, however, if the coal plants  
merely met the new NSPS. 29 The additions would also vary among regions,  
Chapter? 191 since the nuclear plants in question are not distributed in proportion to current  
emissions.  
Pollution-control prospects are slightly less favorable for converting  
oil-fired plants to coal, since NOx control is unavailable short of major boiler  
overhaul, implying emission rates averaging 1.0 lb/106 Btu, considerably  
more than the average for oil. In such cases, extra effort could be invested in  
S02 and particulate abatement to increase offsetting improvements in these  
pollutants.  
Section 7.4: Total Pollution Control Costs  
This chapter has addressed only the impact of pollution controls on coal  
plant capital costs. However, improved controls also affect fuel costs, opera­ting and maintenance (O&M) costs, and performance reliability (capacity  
factor). The heat, steam, and electricity required to run pollution control  
equipment reduce thermal efficiency and raise fuel consumption. O&M costs  
are increased by the limestone and other material required by scrubbers, by  
disposal of ash and sludge, and by personnel to operate and maintain control  
devices. Control equipment breakdowns or gas and moisture ''carryover'' can  
restrict plant operability, although redundant scrubber modules will diminish  
this problem.  
These "non-capital" costs of pollution controls are estimated in the  
discussions of coal fuel and O&M costs and capacity factor in Chapter l l and  
are incorporated into the overall coal generating cost calculation in Table 12. l.  
They are summarized here in Table 7 .4, which indicates that environment­related expenditures will account for about one-third (34%) of the total lifetime  
generating cost of typical 1988 coal plants. The percentage will probably be  
less if 1988 plants merely comply with the new NSPS and are not held to the  
more stringent emission limitations assumed in this chapter and shown in  
Figure 7 .2. In turn, projected capital costs for control equipment will be  
responsible for slightly over half (54%) of all anticipated environment-related  
costs, and O&M costs will account for slightly under one-third (30%).i  
Section 7.5: Alternative Coal Combustion Technologies  
This chapter has not considered the possibility that new coal combustion  
methods might achieve pollution control levels comparable to those specified  
j. These figures supersede the author's statement in an earlier published version of this chapter  
that capital-related costs would make up two-thirds of all environmental costs for future coal  
plants (see Note "a" above). Subsequent to publishing that version, the author significantly  
increased his estimates of O&M pollution-control costs.  
192 Chapter? Table 7.4  
Contribution Of Environmental Controls  
To Coal Generating Costs  
(based on cost projections for 1988 coal plants  
meeting the strict control levels in Fig. 7.2)  
Projected Cost Share ofT otal  
Cost Component (1979 ¢/kWh) Environmental Cost  
l. Capital Costs .73 54%  
2. Fuel Costs .16 12%  
3. O&MCosts AO 30%  
4. Reduced Capacity Factor .06 4%  
TOTAL ENVIRONMENTAL COST 134*  
TOTAL GENERATING COST 3.92  
*Sum of individual costs exceeds total due to rounding.  
Sources: Chapter II and Table 12.1.  
( l) 430/794 (Fig. 7. I) x 1.34~ (capital cost fixed charges. Table  
12.1).  
(2) ~ 800 (assumed heat rate penally)+ 10.000 x 1.96~ (fuel cost).  
(3) assumes that .5¢ O&M cost in 1979 dollars (Section 11.5) in­cludes .02¢ for base particulate control and ash handling, .05¢ for  
improved ash handling, and .25¢ for scrubber. totalling 64% of  
O&M cost, x .62¢ (levelized lifetime O&M).  
(4) assumes that controls reduce capacity factor by 3 percentage  
points. causing increase in capital fixed charges of ( 1-. 70!. 73) x  
1.34.  
here for 1988 plants, at lower cost. Considerable research and development  
effort is being devoted to new technologies, however. The most promising is  
fluidized bed combustion, in which the fuel rests on a layer of inert particles  
suspended by forced air. It has been used in specialized industrial applications  
for several decades but has only recently been examined for power generation.  
Fluidized bed combustion has many prospective advantages over con­ventional combustion: ability to burn limestone together wth coal so that S02  
may be converted and captured without a scrubber; combustion below the  
Chapter? 193 temperature of atmospheric generation of NOx; and formation of a dry, pow­dery ash which is less damaging to plant equipment than ash from conventional  
burning of pulverized coal and also contains fewer heavy metals. Fluidized bed  
boilers are also considerably more compact than conventional boilers. 30  
Coal plants employing fluidized bed combustion are widely predicted to  
be no more costly and possibly cheaper than conventional coal-fired plants,  
assuming both must meet the new NSPS. Similar forecasts have been made for  
gas turbine cycles operating with fluidized bed combustors or integrated  
low-Btu coal gasifiers. Initial operation of commercial-size prototypes is  
unlikely until 1984 at the earliest, however, so it is doubtful that commercial  
plants could be operating before 1990.  
Moreover, current cost estimates for these new technologies are some­what speculative and could prove low if stringent standards necessitate design  
modifications or flue gas treatment. Fluidized bed combustors, for example,  
are considered capable of removing approximately 85% of S02 through con­tact of limestone with coal in the combustor, but scrubbers may be required to  
achieve higher control levels (conversely, refinements such as limestone re­cycle may allow 95% capture or greater).  
A different technology, coal cleaning, holds promise for reducing flue  
gas treatment costs by removing pollution-generating impurities from coal at  
the mine. Proven physical cleaning processes using crushing and flotation­separation can remove half or more of the ash and a third of the sulfur from  
coal, substantially reducing the design requirements of emission control de­vices. Although only a small fraction of utility coal is cleaned today, increased  
costs for coal transportation, waste disposal, and boiler outages- all of which  
are mitigated by cleaning- are making cleaning more economically feasible.  
Coal cleaning may be especially attractive as an alternative to retrofitting  
controls at existing coal plants that must reduce emissions.  
References  
I. DOE, Cost and Quality of Fuels for Electric Utility Plants. /978, DOE/EIA-0 191(78)  
(1979), p. xiii.  
2. PEDCo Environmental, Inc., Cost Analysis of Lime-Based Flue Gas Desulfurization  
Systems for New 500-MW Utility Boilers (EPA, 1979); and Bechtel Power Corp., Coal-Fired  
Power Plant Capital Cost Estimates, EPRJ AF-342 (Palo Alto, CA. 1977). All cost estimates  
have been adjusted to mid-1979 price levels with reai!DC. A subsequent Bechtel study for EPRI  
projects lower scrubber costs (see Reference 6).  
3. EPA, Electric Utility Steam Generating Units: Background fnjormationfor Proposed  
Particulate Matter Emission Standards ( 1978), Table 8·2. Costs were converted to mid-1979  
dollars, with $10/kW and $15/kW added for high- and low-sulfur coal, respectively, for conser­vatism.  
4. These estimates are drawn, with modifications, from three valuable surveys of coal  
194 Chapter7 pollution control costs by the power industry: R.R. Bennett & D.J. Kettler, "Dramatic Changes  
in the Costs of Nuclear and Fossil-Fueled Plants" (Ebasco Services, New York, NY, 1978); K.E.  
Yeager, C.R. McGowin, and S.B. Baruch, "Potential Impact of R&D Programs on Environ­mental Control Costs for Coal-Fired Power Plants" (EPRI, !979); and C.R. McGowin and K.E.  
Yeager, "Advanced Programs for Utilization of Coal for Electric Power Generation" (EPRI,  
1979).  
5. Reference 2, PEDCo Environmental, Inc., Figures 4-1 and 4-2.  
6. Bechtel National, Inc., Economic and Design Facwrs for Flue Gas Desulfurizarion  
Technology, EPRI CS-1428 (1980), Figure 1-3. Current-dollar !DC (13.4% of total cost) was  
removed from costs and replaced by constant-dollar IDC (8% of total cost), and 12.5% was added  
to convert from 1978 to 1979 dollars.  
7. SRI International. lnvestigarinn of High so, Removal Design and Economics. EPRl  
CS-1439 ( 1980), Vol. 2, Table 4-2.  
8. Reference 6,  
9. Reference 4, K.E. Yeager eta/. estimate that 95%-efficient regenerable scrubbers will  
cost $120-170/kW (p.I6). Costs therein, expressed in 1976-1980 mixed current dollars with  
current-dollar !DC, are equivalent to mid-1979 dollars with real !DC.  
10. Reference 6.  
I I. Reference 6, p. 6-9L  
12. Power Engineering, 84 (No. 10), 86-88 (1980).  
13. R.L. Eriksen, "The Development of Dry Flue Gas Desulfurization at Basin Electric  
Power Cooperative," presented at Second Conference on Air Quality Management in the Electric  
Power Industry," Austin, TX (January !980), Capital cost of $49.8 million in 1981 dollars  
(Table 8) was converted to 1979 basis @ assumed 12.5%/year inflation rate and divided by  
500-MW capacity (Table 4). Power requirement of 2.45 MW (Table 8) is for both scrubber and  
ESP but will be slightly higher due to minor design change (telephone communication with R. L.  
Eriksen, Basin Electric Power Coop, 6 February 1981).  
14. Reference 3, Table 7-l.  
15. The "modified Deutch equation" relating ESP costs to removal efficiency predicts a  
70% cost increase to improve efficiency from 99.5% to 99.9%, but it may understate cost  
increases at very high efficiencies.  
16. C. Komanoff, H. Miller, and S. Noyes, The Price of Power: Electric Utilities and the  
Environment (Council on Economic Priorities, 1972; MIT Press, 1974), p. !6.  
17. Reference 3, Table 4-5.  
18. EPA, "New Stationary Source Performance Standards, Electric Utility Steam Gen­erating Units," Part II, Federal Register. 33600 (II June 1979).  
19. Power Engineering, 84 (No. 8), 95 (1980), and telephone communication with H.S.  
Woodson, Senior Staff Specialist, Mechanical Engineering Branch, TVA, 16 December !980.  
20. Reference 3, Table R-1, adjusted to mid-1979 price levels.  
21. J.A. Hudson eta/., "Design and Construction of Baghouses for Shawnee Steam  
Plant," presented at Second Conference on Air Quality Management in the Electric Power  
Industry, Austin, TX (January 1980). Cost estimate therein of $80 million was reduced to S76  
million (1978-81 mixed current dollars with !DC) by H.S. Woodson {Reference 19). Figure is  
equivalent to approximately $40/kW in 1979 dollars with rea! !DC.  
Chapter? 195 22. EPRI Journal. "Controlling Oxides of Nitrogen" (June 1979), p. 26.  
23. Reference 22.  
24. Electric Light and Power, February 1981, p. 19. Cost estimate of $35/kW was  
converted here to mid-1979 dollars by dividing by l. 19, representing 1'h years' inflation @  
12.5%/year.  
25. Stearn-Rogers, Inc., NOx Contra/ for Western Coal-Fired Boilers: Feasibility of  
Selected Post-Combustion NOx Control Systems ( 1978). EPA estimates that SCR systems will  
cost approximately $36/kW, or less than half EPR!'s estimate for full treatment, in J. David  
Mobley, "Status ofEPA's NOx Flue Gas Treatment Program," in EPRI FP-1109-SR, Proceed­ings: Second NOx Control Technology Seminar (1979). See also Session B Questions & Answers  
in same volume.  
26. Reference 4. R.R. Bennett & D.J. Kettler estimate $21/kW (lined sludge pond) and  
$4/kW (lined ash pond), in mixed current dollars concluding in 1978. Assuming a mid-1975  
midpoint for expenditures and incorporating the 37% inflation in coal plant construction from  
mid-1975 to mid-1979 gives the costs in the text.  
27. Reference4, K.E. Yeageretal.  
28. The only controls in use are boiler modifications instituted by several utilities,  
primarily in California, to reduce NOx formation. See Reference 16 or R.H. White, Price of  
Power Update (Council on Economic Priorities, 1977).  
29. Emissions for new coal plants are calculated with emission rates for 1988 plant and  
new NSPS in Fig. 7.2, assuming 3.395 quads to replace 64,600 MW of nuclear@ 60% capacity  
factor and 10,000 Btu/kWh for coal. Mega wattage is based on utility listings of nuclear construc­tion status in DOE, U.S. Central Station Nuclear Electric Generating Units: Significant Mile­stones, DOE/NE-0030/3 (80), pp. 31-35, excluding four reactors listed as on order or under  
construction but subsequently cancelled (North Anna 4, Forked River, and Montague l and 2).  
Emissions for 1988-plant case, in thousand tons, are 340 SOz, 340 NOx, 17 particulates.  
NSPS-plant emissions are I ,020 SOz, 930 NOx, 51 particulates. 1979 utility base is calculated  
from 1979 coal used for electric generation (11.26quads), using 1971-plant rates in Fig. 7 .2. SOz  
base adds one-twelfth to reflect generation with oil (one-quarter as much generation as coal, half  
the average sulfur content, and two-thirds the emissions per sulfur concentration). NO, base adds  
25% to reflect oil and gas (half the generation and half the emission rate). Figures, in thousand  
tons, are 23,200 SOz, 7,040 NO,, and 1,860 particulates. Nationwide emissions from all  
sources, in turn, are approximately 30-35% greater for SOz, 3-4 times as great for NO,, and 5  
times as great for particulates.  
Ohio coal plant is Ohio Power's MuskingumRiver, which in 1979 burned 3, 817,300 tons  
of coal averaging 5. 19% sulfur, emitting 376,000 tons ofSOz, or II% more than the 340,000 tons  
calculated above from all coal generation with 1988 controls to replace nuclear capacity. Two  
TV A plants of approximately 2 ,500-MW capacity emitted even more SOdn 1979: 468,000 tons  
from Paradise (KY) and 379,000 tons from Cumberland (TN).  
30. See Power Engineering. 83 (No. ll), 46-56 ( 1979), for a current review of fluidized  
bed developmental status and design features.  
196 Chapter7 8  
Statistical Analysis  
Of Nuclear Plant  
Construction Costs  
And Durations  
This chapter reports the results ofKomanoffEnergy Associates' statisti­cal analysis of capital costs and construction durations of U.S. nuclear plants  
completed in the 1970s. A parallel analysis for coal plants is described in  
Chapter 9. Both analyses are employed in Chapter 10 to calculate the average  
increases in capital costs and construction durations experienced by nuclear  
and coal plants from 1971 to 1978 and to project likely further increases for  
future plants.  
Section 8.1: Nuclear Capital Costs  
The sample for the nuclear capital cost analysis consists of 46 reactors.  
These are all U.S. reactors completed from December 1971 through December  
1978, except for four "turnkey" plants supplied by reactor manufacturers  
under fixed-fee contracts. The 46 units total39,265 megawatts (MW).  
The excluded turnkey plants and their commercial operation dates are  
Quad Cities I and 2 ( 1972), Point Beach 2 ( 1972), and Indian Point 2 ( 1973).  
The data base also excludes II other commercial-size reactors ( 400 MW or  
larger) completed during 1968-1971. Nine were turnkey units, with reported  
costs that understate their actual costs. A tenth, Connecticut Yankee (1968),  
was subsidized under the Atomic Energy Commission's (AEC) Power Reactor  
Development Program. The eleventh unit, Nine Mile Point I ( J 969), predates  
the first units in the sample by two years and thus was excluded as a dis­continuous data point.  
All of the plants in the data base were ordered between mid- J 965 and  
early 1968. All but the last received construction permits from 1967 to early  
Chapter 8 197 1971, prior to the Ph-year licensing suspension resulting from a U.S. Court  
of Appeals decision requiring the AEC to publish comprehensive environ­mental impact statements in reactor licensing proceedings (the "Calvert  
Cliffs'' decision). The sample excludes several reactors that have reached  
commercial status since the March 1979 accident at Three Mile Island, in­cluding two that received Nuclear Regulatory Commission operating licenses  
shortly before the accident and subsequently achieved commercial status.  
Appendix I lists the entire data base including relevant dates.  
The reactors' capital costs were tabulated from utility data reported to the  
federal government. 1 Because some nuclear plants incur substantial capital  
expenditures shortly after their designated commercial operation date, costs  
were tabulated from data reported for the year following commercial opera­tion, where possible. Additional capital costs incurred in subsequent years  
were not included, however, to avoid biasing the sample in favor of later  
plants, which have had less time to make backfits. (The tendency for nuclear  
capital costs to increase after plant completion is reflected in the allowance for  
interim capital replacements incorporated in the nuclear fixed charge rate in  
Section 11.6.)  
Utilities report costs in mixed current dollars- the sum of the dollars  
spent in each year of construction. They include interest during construction  
(IDC) paid by the utility on capital borrowed during construction. These costs  
were converted to mid-1979 "steam-plant" construction dollars excluding  
IDC through a computational process described in Appendix 3. The adjusted  
costs were then divided by the units' original design electrical ratings to obtain  
capital costs per kilowatt (kW).• The result was a set of 46 per-kW costs  
excluding IDC and adjusted for the effects of inflation in power plant con­struction wages and materials. Real interest during construction (expressed in  
constant dollars) is added back to capital costs in calculating the costs of  
"standard" reactors in Chapter 10.  
These costs were correlated with explanatory variables in a multiple  
regression analysis - a standard procedure for explaining variance in a  
"dependent" variable (capital cost) as a function of variations in "inde­pendent," or "explanatory" variables. The regression equation for nuclear  
costs has seven "statistically significant" variables and an r2 value (goodness  
of fit) of92%. (Statistical terms are explained in Appendix 4.) This is signifi­cantly higher than the r2 values in earlier analyses by Bupp (64% )2 and Mooz  
(76%), 3 indicating that the KEA analysis statistically accounts for a higher  
percentage of nuclear cost variations. The variables and their correlations with  
capital cost are shown in Table 8. I and described below, along with several  
a. Utilities have reduced the original design electrical ratings of approximately 20  
reactors in the data base. The original ratings used here and shown in Appendix I were reported in  
the NRC "Gray Books" until late 1976. The author uses 1hese ratings to calculate capacity  
factors in his studies of nuclear plant perfonnance.  
198 ChapterS Table 8. I  
Nuclear Capital Cost Regression Equation  
Capital Cost ($/kW, without IDC, in mid-1979 steam-plant dollars) =  
6.41 X  
I . 28 if Northeast x  
A-E'· 105 X  
MW·.zoo X  
.903 if Multiplex  
!.34 if Dangling x  
!.20 if Cooling Tower x  
(Cumulative Nuclear Capacity)·577  
r 2 .923  
Adjusted r2 = . 908  
F value= 64.7  
Sample size = 46 units  
Significance  
T-ratio Level(%)  
2.60 99.2  
6.56 99.9+  
6.19 99.9+  
2.54 98.5  
2.48 98.2  
4.73 99.9+  
5.22 99.9+  
13.55 99.9+  
The absolute value of all pairwise correlation coefficients is t<:ss than .34, except  
for .435 between cumulative nuclear capacity and multiple status.  
variables of note whose correlations with capital cost were not statistically  
significant.  
I. Northeast Location: The 46 plants are clustered in three broad  
geographical areas- Northeast (14 plants), Southeast (18 plants), and Mid­west ( 12 plants). The remaining two plants are on the West Coast. There was  
no significant cost difference between Southeast and Midwest plants, but  
Northeast plants were 28% more expensive, on average, than plants in other  
regions. This finding is significant far beyond the 99.9% level, and there is  
95% confidence that the effect lies within an 18-38% increase range.  
The high costs of Northeast units appear due in part to higher construc­tion wage rates. These are generally about 5% higher in the Northeast than in  
the Midwest and 25% higher than in the Southeast. The Northeast is also more  
densely populated and environmentally sensitive than other regions, factors  
Chapter 8 199 that may have led to installation of more costly equipment to reduce accident  
hazards. In addition, the built-up Northeast may have offered fewer suitable  
reactor sites and thereby required more site preparation. Northeast plants had  
longer construction periods (see next section), leading to slightly higher costs  
for interest during construction, but this factor is not included in Table 8.1.  
2. Architect-Engineer Experience4 : Reactor costs declined as the  
number of reactors built by architect-engineers (A-E) increased. This reflects  
the growing ability of increasingly experienced A-Es to manage the complex  
process of nuclear design and construction. The effect is modest, with a  
doubling in an A-E's nuclear experience leading to only a 7% decline in costs.  
Nevertheless, it is statistically significant well beyond the 99.9% level. The  
95% confidence interval ranges between a 5% and 9% cost reduction for each  
doubling of experience.  
Average A-E experience almost quadrupled during the period studied,  
resulting in an average 13% cost reduction. This saving was swamped, how­ever, by the trend toward increased costs as the nuclear sector expanded, as  
discussed below.  
Six of the 46 plants were designed and built by the utility itself- Browns  
Ferry I, 2 and 3, Cook l and 2, and Salem l. They had considerably higher  
costs than other plants, suggesting that utility management of reactor design  
and construction is not a path to lower costs.b  
3. Unit Size: The capital cost projections of the AEC, its successor  
agencies, and the power industry assume that nuclear per-kW costs decline by  
20-30% when reactor size is doubled. 5 Virtually all government and industry  
analyses have applied such economy-of-scale relationships in projecting  
nuclear capital costs.  
The KEA analysis found a far smaller economy of scale in actual experi­ence. The decline in per-kW costs was proportional to the .20 power of unit  
size, so that doubling unit size led to only a 13% reduction in per-kW costs.  
This result is significant at the 98.5% level. The 95% confidence interval,  
expressed in cost reduction per size doubling, ranges from 3% to 22%.  
This result was measured for direct construction costs, without interest  
during construction. Doubling reactor size extended construction time by an  
average of 28%, as shown in the next section. The resulting increase in IDC  
adds approximately 3% to real costs, so that the net effect of doubled size is  
only a 10% cost reduction- half the standard projection.  
b. To eliminate bias in testing for the effect of utility-built plants (self-A-E), costs were  
correlated to self-A-E status and the six other explanatory variables described in text, without  
also testing for A-E number. The result was a 30% higher cost for self-A-E, with a 95%  
confidence interval of 13-50% and a 99.9% significance level. This effect was not included in the  
regression equation discussed here.  
200 ChapterS 4-5. Multiple and Dangling Units: Twenty-two of the 46 units are  
multiple units- identical reactors at the same site. They are typically licensed  
simultaneously and constructed less than two years apart. Minor exceptions  
are Browns Ferry 3, licensed 14 months after units 1 and 2 and completed two  
years later; and Cook 2, licensed with unit I but completed three years later.  
Utilities with multiple nuclear units were not consistent in allocating  
total station costs between the first and subsequent units. Some utilities as­signed equal costs to the units; others weighted either the first or second unit  
more heavily, often for tax or income reasons unrelated to actual cost alloca­tion. For example, the reported cost of Surry 2 was 73% greater than that of  
unit I, while the cost reported for Calvert Cliffs 2 was 22% less than the unit I  
cost (in mixed current dollars). To eliminate such arbitrary variations, the  
constant-dollar direct costs (without IDC) of multiple units were averaged  
here, giving units in a multiple set, such as Oconee I, 2 and 3, identical costs.  
The statistical analysis found that multiple units averaged 9.7% lower  
costs than other reactors. This was the result of shared design effort, common  
facilities, and learning in construction. The 95% confidence interval for this  
effect is a reduction between 2% and 17%, and it is significant at the 98.2%  
level.  
The data base contained four other first units whose successors had not  
been completed at the time of the analysis. These units, Salem I, Hatch I,  
North Anna I and Farley 1, had much higher reported costs than comparable  
plants. This appeared to result from utilities' allocating a large share of the  
stations' joint costs to the first unit. Pending completion of the second units,  
when the two units' costs can be averaged, these four units were given special  
designation in the statistical analysis as dangling units. This enabled their high  
costs to be explained statistically by their stations' incomplete status. Other­wise, the high costs of these recent units would have appeared as a spurious  
increase in the rate of cost escalation over time.  
The effect of dangling status was a 34% higher cost. The 95% confidence  
interval is a range of 18-53%, and the significance level is beyond 99.9%.  
Dangling status is not assumed in any cost projections; rather, it is included in  
the analysis to avoid misinterpreting the effect of other variables.  
6. Cooling Towers: Eighteen of the 46 nuclear units have natural-draft  
cooling towers. Their costs averaged 20% higher than other nuclear plants.  
The 95% confidence interval ranges from 12% to 28%. The effect on costs from  
cooling towers is significant far beyond the 99.9% level.  
There is no apparent reason for the 20% cost differential between units  
with and without cooling towers. Most engineering studies estimate that  
towers added an average of 7-8% to nuclear plant costs during the period  
studied, and that this share declined over time since the cost of towers in­ChapterS 201 creased more slowly than the cost of the reactor plant. Morever, the cost of  
coal plants with towers was not different from plants without towers. Thus, the  
apparent effect of towers on nuclear costs may be a surrogate for some other  
phenomenon.  
One possibility is that the presence of cooling towers resulted from  
public pressure for environmental protection which also led to stricter safety  
measures at those plants, adding to costs. This hypothesis is supported by the  
fact that plants with towers took II% longer to construct than other plants.  
Cooling towers themselves should not add to construction time, since they are  
not part of the "critical path" in construction. Rather, their presence may  
indicate greater local environmental concern which added to safety require­ments at that plant and thus to construction time and cost.  
7. Cumulative Nuclear Capacity (Nuclear Sector Size): As discussed  
previously, all costs were converted to mid-1979 steam-plant dollars without  
interest during construction. Thus, costs were analyzed as if a1146 reactors had  
been built at mid-1979 price levels for nuclear construction labor, materials,  
and equipment. Despite these adjustments, costs are much higher for the later  
plants in the sample, as Figure 8. I shows. This increase cannot be explained by  
changes in the the units' size, location, A-E experience, multiple status, etc.,  
since these factors either did not change appreciably during the study period or  
did not affect costs sufficiently strongly. Indeed, changes in several variables  
would tend to reduce costs (e.g., increased A-E experience), and the effect of  
other variables has been removed from Figure 8.1 in any event.  
The cost increase appears to have been occasioned by the application of  
more stringent and explicit regulatory standards to nuclear plants during the  
late 1960s and throughout the 1970s. As described in Chapter 4, these stan­dards added significantly to the amounts of labor, materials, and equipment  
required to build reactors. Moreover, they frequently were mandated during  
construction, causing changes in design requirements that made it difficult for  
utilities to control schedules and costs.  
In turn, increased regulatory stringency arose from three phenomena, as  
described in Chapter 3: from the effort to reduce the permissible risk to public  
health and safety per reactor; from new information emerging from reactor  
licensing, design reviews, and operating experience indicating that prevailing  
standards were not adequate to reduce risks to desired levels; and from expan­sion of the regulatory effort requiring greater documentation and standardiza­tion of regulatory requirements, generally at a more stringent level.  
To allow for these phenomena in the statistical analysis, two alternative  
regression formulations were examined. In one model, capital costs were  
assumed to be related to time in addition to the six other variables described  
above. In the other model, costs were assumed to be related to the size of the  
nuclear sector. Time was measured by the date each reactor received its  
construction permit from the AEC. Sector size was defined as the megawatts of  
202 Chapter8 c  
I  
8 "  
~ -5  
i  
s  
.E  
s  
~ il:  
I  
1100  
900  
700  
tn 500  
8  
Figure 8.1  
Costs Of Nuclear Plants In The United States  
(normalized to typical plant characteristics and  
1979 construction price levels)  
•  
•  
• • • •  
•  
•  
• • • ...... . •-" Construction Permit Issue Date {by midpoint of year)  
•  
• •  
1967 1968 1969 1970 1971  
10 20  
300 ~~;-----------~----~~---::---------~~------~~~--~~----------- 30 40 50 60  
Nuclear Capacity Operating or Under Construction, GW nuclear capacity operating or being built on the same date, including the new  
plant's capacity.  
Both formulations reflect the effect on costs of the upgrading of nuclear  
regulatory standards. The formulation with sector size, or cumulative nuclear  
capacity, was devised because it appears to capture more of the societal  
processes that give rise to new standards, as discussed in Chapter 3. It also  
yields a higher r2 value in the regression model (see below). The costs  
calculated for standard 1971 and 1978 reactors in Chapter 10 are relatively  
independent of which formulation is employed, however. The choice of sector  
size or time is important primarily for projectingfuture nuclear capital costs.  
For the sample of 1972-1978 plants studied here, cumulative nuclear  
capacity ranges from 10,621 MW for the first reactor receiving a construction  
permit, Palisades (allowing for the 9800 MW total capacity of the 15 commer­cial plants predating the sample, plus Palisades' 821 MW), to 55,573 MW for  
the last licensed plant, Farley I. The latter figure includes the capacities of six  
reactors that received their construction permits prior to Farley I but had not  
been completed when the analysis was performed: Diablo Canyon I and 2,  
North Anna 2, Salem 2, and Sequoyah I and 2.  
The correlation obtained in the regression equation shows nuclear capital  
costs rising at a rate proportional to the .58 power of cumulative nuclear  
capacity. At this rate, each doubling of the size of the nuclear sector produced a  
49% cost increase.< The 95% confidence level is a range of 41% to 58% in the  
cost increase from doubling the sector - an exceedingly narrow (and thus  
precise) interval. The significance level is far beyond the 99.9% mark.  
The nuclear sector expanded almost five-fold in the study period. As­sociated with this expansion was a 172% increase in costs (beyond steam-plant  
construction inflation) to build plants to lower levels of risk, according to the  
above correlation. This increase swamps the J 3% reduction in costs attribut­able to the increase in architect-engineer experience during the sample period.  
(The net nuclear cost increase from 1971 to 1978 is calculated in Chapter I 0.)  
Non-Significant Variables: Nuclear costs were not significantly cor­related with the following variables: reactor type (boiling or pressurized water  
reactor), reactor manufacturer, regional seismic potential, proximity to urban  
centers, and licensing time. The lack of a seismic-cost correlation is not  
surprising since none of the data base plants are in "severe" or "high"  
seismic risk regions, 6 so that seismic design criteria varied more with plant  
chronology than with geography. The absence of an urban-proximity correla­tion with costs was related to the Jack of any heavily urban sites and also to the  
AEC/NRC tendency to extend standards developed for high-population plants  
to other reactors licensed at the same time or slightly later.  
c. The rationale for expressing costs as an exponential function of sector size. rather than  
as some other function, is explained in Appendix 4.  
204 ChapterS Licensing time - the interval between construction permit application  
and award- increased throughout the period studied, although not by a large  
amount: from an average of about a year for the first plants receiving construc­tion permits to I V2-2 years for most later plants. Because licensing time  
increased together with nuclear sector size (their correlation coefficient was  
. 77), the regression equation with both variables may not authoritatively  
depict their effects on costs. Still, the regression result- a mere 7% decline in  
the size of the coefficient relating costs to sector size, while licensing time is  
not even remotely significant- appears to disprove the notion that funds spent  
during licensing added significantly to the real costs of completed plants.d  
Longer licensing periods did, of course, push back construction permit issu­ance and expose specific plants to greater regulatory requirements, but this  
phenomenon primarily affected the costs of plants whose permit sequencing  
was interchanged, without appreciably changing costs for the nuclear sector as  
a whole.  
Other Treatments of Temporal Cost Increases: As mentioned above,  
costs were also correlated with the date of construction permit issuance (''CP  
date") rather than with nuclear sector size. In this regression equation, costs  
were found to increase by an average of23 .6% (in real terms) for each one-year  
increase in CP date. If this increase rate appears extraordinarily high, recall  
that all but the last of the 46 reactors received their construction permits over a  
four-year span, from March !967 to March !97!. When costs are correlated  
with the date of plant completion, the average annual increase rate is 13. I%  
over the seven years during which the sample plants achieved commercial  
status (December 1971 to December 1978). An average 1971-78 increase rate  
of 13.5% per year of completion is calculated for ''standard plants'' in Chapter  
!0, incorporating real IDC and changes in other variables such as A-E experi­ence and plant size.  
Table 8. 2 shows the regression results for the equation with construction  
permit date substituted for sector size. The r2 value is 87 .6%, almost five  
percentage points less than the 92.3% r 2 for the model with sector size. The six  
other variables that were significant in the regression with sector size are also  
significant with CP date, and their values are not significantly changed, with  
one exception: cooling towers add only 11.3% to cost, compared with 19.5%  
previously. The r2 value for the regression with plant completion date (not  
shown here) is much lower, 78.4%.  
d. When cost was regressed on sector size, licensing time, and variables 1-6 described  
above, it was found to be proportional to the .54 power of sector size (versus .58 previously) and  
to the .08 power of licensing time. T-ratios were 8.4 and 0.8, respectively, indicating only 59%  
statistical significance for licensing time. This result duplicates Mooz's finding as to the non­significance of licensing time (Reference 3).  
Chapter 8 205 Table 8.2  
Nuclear Capital Cost Regression Equation,  
Alternative Model Using Date  
Capital Cost {$/kW, without IDC, in mid-1979 steam-plant dollars) =  
!. 14 X 10' 3 X  
!.33 if Northeast x  
A-E-· 12 ' X  
MW·.Z03 X  
.88 if Multiplex  
!. 24 if Dangling x  
I. II if Cooling Tower x  
( J.236)CP Date  
r' = .876  
Adjusted r' = .853  
F value = 38.3  
Sample size = 46 units  
T-ratio  
4.48  
6.09  
5.61  
2.03  
2.45  
2.69  
2.53  
10.01  
CP Date is last two digits of year, e.g .. July 1969 = 69.5.  
Significance  
Level{%)  
99.9+  
99.9+  
99.9+  
95. I  
98.1  
98.9  
98.4  
99.9+  
Treatment of Operating Experience: Another alternative regression  
model correlated capital costs to both nuclear sector size and cumulative  
reactor operating experience - the number of unit-years of operation reg­istered by all commercial reactors when the plant in question received its  
operating license. The intent was to measure the impact of operating experi­ence on costs separately from that of increased sector size. The former factor  
leads to higher costs by revealing generic design and construction deficiencies;  
the ]alter increases public exposure to reactor risks and thus engenders a  
regulatory disposition to reduce the acceptable level of per-reactor risks.  
The regression with both sector size and operating experience is shown in  
Table 8.3. The r2 value is slightly higher than for the regression with sector size  
alone- 92.9% vs. 92.3%. The variable denoting cumulative operating ex­perience ("OPEX") is significant to only the 93% confidence level, however,  
206 ChapterS Table 8.3  
Nuclear Capital Cost Regression Equation,  
Alternative Model Using Sector Size And Operating  
Experience  
Capital Cost ($/kW, without IDC, in mid-1979 steam-plant dollars)=  
16.2 X  
1.28 if Northeast x  
A-E·-094 X  
MW~-266 X  
.897 if Multiplex  
1.3 I if Dangling x  
I. 18 if Cooling Tower x  
(Cumulative NuclearCapacity)·50.1 x  
OPEX·067  
r2 = .929  
Adjusted r2 .914  
Fvalue = 60.7  
Sample size 46 units  
Significance  
T-ratio Level  
3.41 99.8  
6.78 99.9+  
5.37 99.9+  
3,16 99,7  
2.70 99.0  
4.37 99.9+  
4.89 99.9+  
8.62 99.9+  
1.86 92.9  
less than the standard 95% confidence threshold. Moreover, OPEX and sector  
size are too closely correlated to each other (with a correlation coefficient of  
.66) for the measures of their effects on costs to be considered fully reliable.  
This regression is therefore not used here to project future costs.  
The correlation coefficients in Table 8.3 are very similar to those in Table  
8. I, except that a somewhat greater cost saving is associated with increased  
plant size. In addition, a slightly lesser cost increase is associated with sector  
size expansion since growth in operating experience now shares some of the  
responsibility for the higher costs. Based on the regression coefficients and  
past growth in reactor-years (from 13 when the first sample plant received its  
operating license to 218 for the last), a 21% cost increase was associated with  
increased operating experience during 1971-78 while a 139% cost increase was  
associated with sector size expansion. These allocations of the overall 1971-78  
ChapterS 207 cost increase are not conclusive, however, for the reasons stated above.  
Section 8.2: Nuclear Construction Durations  
This section describes the statistical analysis of nuclear plant construc­tion durations - the time interval between the date of construction permit  
award and the date the utility declared the unit to be in commercial service.  
These data were compiled from DOE and NRC reports, respectively. 7  
The nuclear cost analysis reported above was based on a sample of 46  
plants completed by the end of 1978. The construction duration analysis is  
based on a nearly identical 49-plant sample: all nuclear plants that received  
construction permits between March 1967 and March 1971, inclusive, except  
Diablo Canyon I and 2, whose commercial operation dates were too uncertain  
to predict.  
The sample includes all 46 plants in the cost sample except Farley I,  
which received a construction permit in August 1972 following the licensing  
suspension that began in March 1971 pursuant to the "Calvert Cliffs" deci­sion. It adds four plants which received construction permits before March  
1971 but were incomplete at the time of the analysis. They were included to  
avoid biasing the results by excluding plants that took longer to complete than  
other concurrently licensed plants. Commercial operation dates for the four  
plants were estimated absent the post-Three Mile Island licensing suspension!  
The regression analysis correlates the 49 plants' construction durations  
to eight explanatory variables -the six that significantly correlated with costs  
(all except "dangling" status) and two others. The r2 value for the regression  
is 66%- slightly higher than Mooz's 63%. (Bupp did not study construction  
time; see References 2 and 3.) The variables and correlations are shown in  
Table 8.4 and described below.  
/. Unit Size: Construction time correlated with nuclear plant size at  
the 99.9% significance level. The effect is such that a doubling of unit size  
produced a 28% increase in construction time. Thus, for example, a 1000-MW  
unit licensed in early !969 would require 74 months to complete vs. 58 months  
for a 500-MW unit licensed at the same time. The 95% confidence interval  
ranges from an II% to 48% increase for doubled size.r  
The longer time required to build large reactors results from their larger  
physical requirements. The quantity of labor, equipment, and materials rises  
e. The four (with estimated completion dates) are Salem 2 and North Anna 2 (December  
1979), and Sequoyah l and 2 (February and October 1979). Actually. only North Anna 2 reached  
commercial status before 1981 (December 1980).  
f. The measured effect of size would increase if the large (approximately 1100 MW) and  
long-duration Diablo Canyon units were included in the sample.  
208 ChapterS Table 8.4  
Nuclear Construction Duration Regression Equation  
Construction Duration (in months) =  
,980 X  
MW·H• X  
A-E·, l" X  
(Cumulative Nuclear Capacity)·"' x  
I. 12 if Northeast x  
I. 13 if Southeast x  
I, 20 if Duplicate x  
I, II if Cooling Tower x  
I. 17 if Babcock & Wilcox NSSS  
r 2 = .661  
Adjusted r2 = .593  
F value= 9. 74  
Sample size = 49 units  
Significance  
T-ratio Level(%)  
3.16 99.7  
3.48 99.9  
4.59 99.9+  
3.44 99.9  
1.87 93.1  
2.17 96.4  
3,60 99.9  
2.19 96.5  
2,72 99.0  
The absolute value of all pairwise correlation coefficients is less than .3, except  
.552 for the correlation between Southeast and Northeast location.  
All variables are significant to at least the 95% level except Northeast location  
(93%).  
with increasing size, although the per-kW quantity declines. The longer  
construction time for large units adds to the cost of interest during construc­tion. This reduces the apparent 13% cost saving from doubling plant size  
(obtained in the cost analysis without !DC) to approximately 10%.  
2. Architect-Engineer Experience: Doubling an A-E's nuclear plant  
construction experience saved 7% in construction time. Although this effect is  
modest, its statistical significance is the highest of any variables in the regres­sion equation- over 99. 9%. The 95% confidence range is a 4-10% reduction  
per doubling in the number of plants built.  
Shortened construction duration is a consequence of increasing architect­Chapter 8 209 engineer familiarity with the physical, regulatory, and managerial problems in  
building nuclear plants. The 7% reduction in construction time is the same as  
the drop in cost per doubling of experience. A-E experience increased by 275%  
for a typical unit in the sample, leading to a 14% reduction in average  
construction time, equivalent to a nine-month reduction. This was more than  
offset by the lengthening of construction associated with expansion of the  
nuclear sector, however.  
3. Cumulative Nuclear Capacity (Nuclear Sector Size): Real in­creases in nuclear capital costs over time were correlated above to cumulative  
nuclear capacity - the size of the nuclear sector. Here, regressing construc­tion time on sector size yields a mild increase rate. Construction time was  
proportional to the .18 power of the amount of nuclear capacity installed or  
under construction. The significance level is 99 .8%. A doubling of sector size  
thus Jed to a 14% lengthening of construction time; the 95% confidence interval  
is a 5% to 23% increase per doubling of nuclear capacity.  
The nuclear sector grew almost five-fold during the study period, from  
9800 MW to 55,573 MW. The statistical relation implies that an average  
increase of 38% in construction time was associated with this growth in  
capacity. The new requirements for reactor design, construction, and quality  
assurance brought forth by sector expansion Jed to extended project time. Note  
that this construction lengthening is not directly attributable to citizen inter­vention in licensing hearings; interventions did delay award of construction  
permits in some cases, but they had virtually no effect on the sample plants  
once construction began.  
This 38% lengthening of construction and the 14% reduction due to A-E  
learning were the major changes in construction periods for the sample plants.  
Construction time was sensitive to reactor size, but unit sizes grew only  
slightly in the 1970s, measured by date of construction permit award.  
4. Cooling Towers: Nuclear plants with cooling towers (19 of the 49  
sample plants, or 39%) required II% longer to build, on average, than other  
plants. This variable is significant at the 96.5% level. The 95% confidence  
interval is an increase range of 1-21%. For a typical plant in the sample, the  
statistically inferred impact of a tower was seven additional months.  
As discussed in the cost analysis, however, cooling towers are not on the  
"critical path" of construction steps determining plant completion. Addition  
of a tower therefore should not add to construction time. Presence of a cooling  
tower may indicate regulatory sensitivity to environmental concerns leading to  
additional measures to reduce nuclear hazards, adding to construction time.  
This conjecture is unproven, however.  
5-6. Northeast or Southeast Location: Twenty of the 49 plants are  
located in the Southeast, 15 are in the Northeast, 12 in the Midwest, and two on  
210 Chapter 8 the West Coast. Southeast plants took 13% longer to construct, and Northeast  
plants 12% longer, than Midwest and West Coast plants.  
The Southeast result is significant to the 96.4% level, with a 95%  
confidence interval from 1% to 18%. The Northeast result has a confidence  
interval ranging from I% shorter duration to 26% longer, and it is significant  
only to the 93. I% level- below the standard 95% threshold for significance.  
It is included here because a separate analysis of total project time- the period  
extending from NSSS order to commercial operation- shows a !3% longer  
project duration for Northeast units, significant to the 98.6% level.  
The longer Northeast construction duration may result from adverse  
weather, less favorable site conditions requiring increased site preparation,  
and more stringent design and construction standards in response to higher  
population densities and greater public concern. These factors do not appear to  
explain the longer construction times for southern plants. This finding is  
inconsistent, moreover, with the shorter construction pedod found for south­ern coal units. It also belies the widespread notion that the predominantly  
non-union workforces at southern plants can build plants faster than union  
labor.  
7. Duplicate Units: The 15 duplicate units second or third identical  
units at a single site - had an average 20% longer construction period than  
other units. This difference is equivalent to 13 months for a typical reactor in  
the sample. The result is 99.9% significant, with a 95% confidence interval of  
8% to33%.  
This finding reflects the deliberate staging of construction of multiple  
units to complete second units one-half to two years after initial units. Such a  
schedule is said to optimize the sharing of unit designs, engineering staff,  
construction crews, and field equipment. Most multiple units receive construc­tion permits at the same time, so that duplicate units, completed later, have  
longer construction periods. Construction times for initial units in a multiple  
set did not differ from those for units built one to a site.  
8. Babcock & Wilcox Reactors: The nine plants using nuclear steam  
supply systems manufactured by Babcock & Wilcox (B&W) had 17% average  
longer construction durations than other units (controlling for other variables).  
The finding is significant to the 99.0% level, with a 95% confidence interval of  
4% to 32%. It appears to have resulted from manufacturing problems that  
caused delays in construction of B& W reactor vessels during the sample  
period. 8 Since this appears to have been a one-time phenomenon, it is not built  
into the projections of future nuclear construction duration in Chapter 10.  
Mooz also found that B&W plants took longer to construct, but neither  
his nor this analysis found any cost differences for B&W plants. Mooz hypoth­esized that the architect-engineers of B& W plants were able to take steps to  
ChapterS 21 l control costs when construction times exceeded normal levels. His hypothesis  
is intriguing. if unproven.  
References  
I. Energy Information Administration (formerly Federal Power Commission). Steam·  
Electric Plant Construction Costs and Annual Production Expenses (annual).  
2. LC. Bupp eta/., Trends in Light Water Reaeor Capital Costs in the United States:  
Causes and Consequences. CAP 74-8 (Center for Policy Alternatives. MIT, Cambridge, MA,  
1974), abridged in Technology Review, 77 (No.2), 15-25 { 1975).  
3. W. Mooz, Cost Analysis of Light Water Reactor Power Plants, R-2304-DOE ( 1978).  
and A Second Cost Analysis of Light Water Reactor Power Plants, R-2504-RC ( 1979), (RAND  
Corporation, Santa Monica, CA).  
4. This explanatory variable was first employed by Mooz (see Reference 3).  
5. See AEC, Power Plant Capital Costs: Current Trends and Sensitivity to Economic  
Parameters, WASH-1345 (1974); any ERDA or DOE documentation of the "CONCEPT"  
computer program for projecting power plant costs; or Electric Power Research Institute,  
Technical Assessment Guide. EPRI PS-1201-SR (1979), p. 8-5.  
6. As reported in a seismic risk map in Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.  
Spectrum. November !979, map facing p. 49, adapted from Bolt et al .. Geological Hazards  
(Springer-Verlag, NY, 1977).  
7. DOE, U.S. Central Station Nuclear Electric Generating Units: Significant Milestones.  
DOE/NE-0030, quarterly. NRC, Operating Units Status Report, NUREG-0020, monthly.  
8. Nucleonics Week, 20 September 1979, p. 9.  
212 ChapterS 9  
Statistical Analysis  
Of Coal Plant  
Construction Costs  
And Durations  
This chapter reports the results of Komanoff Energy Associates' (KEA)  
statistical analysis of the capital costs and construction durations of U.S.  
coal-fired plants completed in the 1970s. The preceding chapter presented a  
parallel analysis for nuclear plants. Both analyses are employed in the next  
chapter to calculate the average increases in capital costs and construction  
durations experienced by nuclear and coal plants from 1971 to 1978 and to  
project likely further increases for future plants.  
Section 9.1: Coal Plant Capital Costs  
The sample for the coal-fired plant capital cost analysis consists of 116  
generating units. These are all U.S. coal-fired units of 100 megawatts {MW) or  
greater capacity, completed from January !972 through December 1977.  
Several data sources were examined to ensure that all applicable coal-fired  
units were included in the sample. 1 The 116 units total 70,509 MW. They  
range from 114 MW to 1300 MW, and average 608 MW. Fifteen of the units  
have flue gas desulfurization devices, or "scrubbers."  
The units' capital costs were compiled from utility data reported to the  
federal government2 and are listed in Appendix 2. Because these data are  
tabulated by station, costs of "add-on" units were calculated by subtracting  
the cost reported for the station in the prior year from the cost reported for the  
year of commercial operation. The costs were then converted from reported  
"mixed current dollars" to mid-1979 "steam-plant" dollars, excluding in­terest during construction (IDC), through a computational process described in  
Appendix 3. These adjusted costs were divided by the units' nameplate capac­Chapter9 2!3 ity ratings, yielding capital costs per kilowatt." The result was a set of 116  
per·kilowatt (kW) costs excluding IDC and adjusted for the effects of inflation  
in power plant construction wages and materials. Real IDC is added back to the  
capital costs in Chapter I 0, based on the inftation·adjusted cost of capital and  
the actual average construction durations for the coal plants in the sample.  
The costs were correlated with explanatory variables in a multiple re·  
gression analysis. The regression equation has nine statistically significant  
variables and an r2 value (goodness of fit) of 68%. This compares favorably  
with the 43% r2 in Bupp's analysis,4 indicating that the KEA analysis statisti·  
cally explains a higher percentage of coal capital cost variations. The variables  
and their correlations with capital cost are shown in Table 9. I and described  
below, along with several variables that did not correlate significantly with  
cost.  
I -4. Regional Variables: Costs were correlated significantly with four  
regional variables, as shown in Table 9. 2. The Midwest is the base region  
against which the regions in Table 9.2 are compared. It extends in the West  
from Kansas and Missouri, north to the Dakotas; and in the East from Kentucky  
and West Virginia, to Michigan and Wisconsin. It contains 57 (49%) of the  
sample plants.  
The five Northeast plants were all built in Pennsylvania and averaged  
14% higher cost than the base plant.b This is probably accounted for by higher  
labor costs and more stringent environmental requirements in Pennsylvania.  
Western plants were considerably more costly, by 26% on average, than the  
Midwest base plant. This resulted from many factors: environmental standards  
in many states exceeding federal standards; the markedly higher cost of  
electrostatic precipitators for controlling particulates from the low-sulfur coal  
used in the West (see Chapter 7); remote sites adding to transportation costs for  
materials and equipment; shortages of skilled labor; and high wage rates.  
The lower costs of Southeast plants, 14% less than the base plants,  
probably resulted from weaker environmental standards, favorable construc­tion weather, and, perhaps, predominant use of cheaper non-union labor. The  
considerable experience amassed by regional utilities in constructing coal·  
fired plants may also have contributed to lower costs.  
The markedly lower cost of the Texas-Oklahoma plants - 24% below  
a. Nameplate ratings have previously been employed by the author to calculate coal  
capacity factors' and are used here similarly in Section I I .2. Alternative, lower net "capabil­ity" ratings vary too greatly by recording agency to be definitive. Their use would increase  
per-kW capital costs by several percent but would increase coal capacity factors by an equal.  
offsetting amount.  
b. Costs of the five Pennsylvania nuclear plants averaged 5% above those of other  
Northeast nuclear plants, which in tum averaged 28% above base nuclear costs. Thus, Penn­sylvania coal phint costs should not understate coal capital costs elsewhere in the NortheasL  
214 Chapter9 Table 9.1  
Coal Capital Cost Regression Equation  
Capital Cost ($/kW, without rDC, in mid-1979 steam-plant dollars) =  
.234 X  
I. 14 if Northeast x  
1.26 if West x  
. 76 if South Central x  
.86 if Southeast (not Southern Company) x  
. 73 if Southern Company x  
I. 18 if American Electric Power x  
.904 if Multiple unit x  
1.26 if Scrubber x  
(Cumulative Coal Capacity)·615  
r2 .679  
Adjusted r' .652  
F value= 24.9  
Sample Size = l I 6 units  
Significance  
T -ratio Level(%)  
.89 62.3  
1.81 92.7  
5.47 99.9+  
4.51 99.9+  
3.09 99.7+  
5.88 99.9+  
2.26 97.4  
3.25 99.8  
4.86 99.9+  
4.36 99.9+  
All pairwise correlation coefficients have an absolute value equal to or less than  
.36.  
the Midwest base - is noteworthy in view of the lignite and sub-bituminous  
coal utilized. Its average heating value, 7,436 Btu/pound, is 29% below the  
10,436 Btu/pound sample average. This low-quality coal requires a signific­antly larger boiler, greater pulverizer capability, and a more expensive precip­itator, all of which should add to capital costs. The use of non-union construc­tion labor might help offset these factors, but it alone would not account for the  
24% lower cost.  
5-6. Company Variables: Table 9.3 shows that costs were significantly  
correlated with ownership by two large utility holding companies: the South­ern Company, with ten units in the sample; and American Electric Power  
(AEP), with five. The cost differences between these plants and the rest of the  
Chapter9 215 Table 9.2  
Coal Cost Correlations To Regional Variables  
Effect 95% Confidence Significance Number of Plants/  
Region OnCost Interval Level(%) Share ofTotal Sample  
Northeast +14% - l% to +32% 92.7 5/4%  
West +26% +l6%to +37% 99.9+ 20/17%  
Southeast -!6% -22% to- 5% 99.7+ 12/10%  
South Central -24% -·32% to -14% 99.9+ 817%  
All Northeast plants are in Pennsylvania. Although the Northeast variable falls  
below the 95% confidence threshold, it is included in the regression because of the  
importance of establishing a baseline value for Northeast coal plant costs.  
South Central is Texas and Oklahoma.  
Southeast is Tennessee, the Carolinas, Florida, Georgia, Alabama, and Missis·  
sippi, but excludes 10 Southern Company units. These are treated separately in  
Table 9.3. The effect on cost of all 22 Southeast plants together is -20%. with  
99.9+% significance and a confidence interval of -26% to -14%.  
Table 9.3  
Coal Cost Correlations To Company Variables  
Company  
Southern  
American  
Effect  
OnCost  
-27%  
+18%  
95% Confidence  
Interval  
34% to -19%  
+2% to +36%  
Significance  
Level(%)  
99.9+  
97.4  
Nwnber of Plants/  
Share OfTotal Sample  
10/9%  
5/4%  
The Southern Company units do not overlap with the Southeast units represented in  
Table 9.2.  
sample can probably be explained by the two utilities' approaches to plant  
design and operation. AEP builds highly reliable and efficient units, with  
2!6 Chapter9 outage rates and heat rates (fuel input per net kWh) among the lowest in the  
industry. 5 This performance is achieved through conservative design prac­tices, use of high quality components and materials, and generous stocking of  
spare parts, all of which helped make the AEP plants 18% more expensive to  
construct than comparable plants.  
Conversely, Southern Company's low-cost coal-fired plants - 27%  
cheaper than Midwest plants and 15% less than other Southeast plants- tend  
to have below-average reliability and fuel efficiency. It is beyond the scope of  
this study, however, to determine whether the more conservative design  
philosophy (higher first costs but better performance) gives lower costs in the  
long run.  
7. Multiple Units: Units that share a site with another identical unit are  
considered multiple units, regardless of whether they are the first or last at the  
site. The constant-dollar costs of multiple units were averaged to obtain  
uniform costs for each unit at a site. This eliminates differences in utilities'  
allocation of joint costs among units.  
Sixty-eight of the 116 units are multiple units (another 15 are initial units  
with incomplete second units at the time of the analysis). Their costs averaged  
9.6% less than those of non-multiple units. This finding is significant to the  
99.8% level, with a 95% confidence interval ranging from -4% to -15%. It is  
consistent with the power industry rule-of-thumb that a station with two  
identical units can be built 8-10% less expensively than a single-unit station. It  
also replicates the 9. 7% lower cost found for multiple nuclear units. The cost  
savings result from common plant facilities, shared construction equipment,  
skill transfer in design and construction, and joint environmental review.  
8. Scrubbers: Fifteen of the units are equipped with full-capacity flue  
gas desulfurization systems, or scrubbers. All included scrubbers in the origi­nal design - none are "retrofits." They averaged 26% higher cost than  
comparable units without scrubbers. The difference is equivalent to $120/kW  
in mid-1979 dollars (including real IDC). The significance level for the scrub­ber correlation is beyond 99.9%, and the 95% confidence interval runs from  
15% to 38%. Units with scrubbers are volatile in costs, however, deviating by  
an average of 15% from the costs predicted for units with their characteristics,  
compared to l I% for non-scrubber units.  
The scrubbers have an average design efficiency of74% and are intended  
to remove an average of 3. 7 pounds of sulfur dioxide (SOz) per million Btu of  
coal burned, This is equivalent to a reduction of 2. I percentage points in sulfur  
content for typical utility coal with an II ,000 Btu/pound heating value. Table  
9.4 suggests that scrubbers designed to remove larger quantities of S02 may  
cost more, but there are considerable deviations and no clear trend is apparent.  
9. Cumulative Coal Capacity (Coal Sector Size): The increases over  
Chapter9 217 Table 9.4  
Cost Deviations For Coal Units With Scrubbers  
Coal Design Removal Pounds so, Removed Deviation From  
Unit Sulfur% Efficiency (%) Per Milllon Btu Predicted Cost  
Duck Creek I 2.75 85.0 5.1 +43%  
Gardner 3 0.5 85.0 0.7 +30%  
Mansfield I 4.7 92.1 7.4 +18'k  
Mansfield 2 4.7 92.1 7.4 +18%  
Petersburg 3 3.25 80.0 4.8 +12%  
Colstrip I 0.8 60.0 Ll + 4%  
Manin Lake I LO 70.5 2.1 + 1%  
Colstrip2 0.8 60.0 Ll - 2%  
Southwest I 3.5 80.0 4.9 4%  
Young2 0.7 75.0 1.6 - 8%  
Winyah2 1.0 69.0 L2 9%  
La Cygne I 5.0 76.0 8.2 -12%  
Conesville 5 4.7 89.5 8. I -20%  
Sherburne I 0.8 50.0 0.9 -22%  
Sherburne 2 0.8 50.0 0.9 -24%  
Average 2.3 74 3.7  
Deviation from predicted cost is difference between actual cost and cost calculated  
by regression equation from plant characteristics. Although deviations expressed  
as percentages do not add to zero. the sum of their logarithms is zero.  
time in the per-kW costs of the coal plants in the sample were considerable  
even after all costs were converted to mid-1979 construction dollars without  
interest during construction. A part of these cost increases was caused by the  
addition of scrubbers to some of the later plants in the data sample. But  
increased costs also resulted from improvements in other pollution control  
features, such as electrostatic precipitators, nitrogen oxide controls, and solid  
waste handling, as Chapter 7 shows.  
The addition to coal plant costs from improvements in environmental  
equipment in the 1970s parallels the cost increases at nuclear plants sparked by  
218 Chapter9 new safety-related regulatory requirements. In both cases, expansion of the  
respective generating sectors raised the level of potential environmental and  
accident hazards associated with nuclear and coal generation of electricity and  
provided the impetus for remedial control measures. Three alternative regres­sion formulations were examined to allow for this process in the statistical  
analysis of coal plant costs. In two models, coal capital costs were assumed to  
be related to time in addition to the preceding variables just described; in the  
third model, costs were assumed to be related to the size of the coal generating  
sector. Time was measured by either the date the coal boiler was ordered from  
the vendor (dates for actual construction starts were not available for the entire  
sample) or the date the plant was declared to be in commercial operation.  
Sector size was defined as the megawatts of coal generating capacity operating  
or being built on the order date, including the new plant's capacity.  
All three formulations reflect the effect on costs of the upgrading of coal  
plant regulatory standards. The formulation wth coal sector size was devised  
because it appears to capture more of the societal processes that give rise to  
new standards, and in order to parallel the nuclear cost formulation adopted in  
Chapter 8. The three formulations have approximately equal statistical explan­atory power, however, as reflected by their r 2 values. Moreover, the costs  
calculated for typical 1971 and 1978 coal plants in the next chapter do not  
depend heavily upon the choice of sector size or time. That choice is important  
only for projecting future coal plant capital costs.  
For the model using sector size, cumulative coal capactty prior to the  
ordering of the first plant in the data base was estimated at 142 gigawatts (GW,  
l GW = 1000 MW).c Cumulative coal capacity of217 ,348 MW was calculated  
for the I 16th and last sample plant by adding each new plant in sequence of its  
boiler order (including 16 units ordered before the last plant and completed  
during 1978, following the December 1977 sample cut-off date), and allowing  
for retirements equaling 5% of new capacity additionsd  
The correlation yielded by the model shows coal capital costs rising at a  
rate proportional to the . 61 power of cumulative coal capacity. This rate is only  
.03 greater than the exponential increase rate for nuclear costs, but the latter  
increased much more during I 97 I -78 because the nuclear sector was growing  
proportionately much faster than the coal sector.  
Based on the . 61-power relationship, a 30% increase in the cost of coal  
plants was associated with the 53% increase in coal sector size during the study  
c. U.S. fossil steam-electric capacity at the end of 1971 was 260.4 GW according to EIA  
(see Reference l, 1972 edition). Coal accounted for 54.6% of 1971 fuel consumption by this  
capacity (1975 edition). Prorating generation to capacity- a reasonable assumption given low  
differences in plant running costs at that time- 1971 coal capacity is calculated to be 142.2 GW,  
rounded to 142 GW.  
d. The ratio of retirements to new fossil capacity averaged5.4% in 1971-75, based on the  
EIA reports (Reference I). Boiler ordering dates were taken from Kidder Peabody data (Refer­ence I). These data are used by EIA analysts and are considered definitive.  
Chapter9 219 period. This figure does not include the separately measured 26% addition to  
costs from scrubbers. The 95% confidence interval for the coal sector exponent  
ranges from .34 to .89 (implying a confidence range of 26% to 86% in the  
impact of sector doubling), and statistical significance is beyond the 99.9%  
level.  
Non-Significant Variables: Coal costs were not significantly correlated  
with the following variables: coal heat content, supercritical {high-pressure)  
boilers, use of cooling towers, boiler manufacturer, designation as a "dangl­ing'' unit (the first unit in an incomplete station of several identical units), and  
unit size.  
The last result is especially important. Larger unit sizes are widely  
believed to bring economies in construction. A long-standing industry-govern­ment rule of thumb holds that coal per-kW capital costs decline by 10-15%  
when plant size is doubled.6 But only a weak effect, a 3% cost reduction for  
doubled size, was evident here, and it had only 82% statistical significance.  
Moreover. larger coal units take longer to build. Doubled size added an  
average of 13% to project duration for the sample plants, as shown in the next  
section. The accompanying increase in real interest during construction caused  
a I% cost addition per size doubling, partly offsetting the tentative, minor  
scale economy observed in direct construction costs.  
Other Treatments ofTemporal Cost increase: Several other regression  
models were tested for coal capital costs. In two, costs were correlated with  
time- the date of boiler order or the date of plant commercial completion.  
These regressions are shown in Table 9. 5.  
The table indicates little difference in coefficients between the two  
regressions employing time, and between them and the model employing  
sector size (Table 9. l ). It also shows costs increasing at a little over 4% for  
each later year of plant ordering or completion. This result excludes the  
separately measured effect of scrubbers. That effect is added in the next  
chapter and contributes to a calculated average annual I 971-78 cost increase  
rate of7. 7% when a "standard" !978 coal plant with a scrubber is compared to  
a 1971 plant without."  
Table 9.6 present the final coal cost regression. Like Table 9.1, it uses  
coal sector size t() represent the accretion ofenvironmental standards adding to  
costs, but unlike that model it omits the variable denoting scrubbers. The result  
is an increase in the exponent relating costs to cumulative coal capacity, from  
.61 to .86, and a corresponding increase from 53% to 82% in the apparent  
effect on cost of a doubling of sector size. The increases arise because the share  
e. The coal sample may be said to e~t~nQ.to the end of 1978 because all U.S. coal plants  
completed in 1978 were ordered prior to the last plant included in the data base (completed in  
1977).  
220 Chapter9 Table 9.5  
Coal Capital Cost Regressions,  
Alternative Models Using Date  
Capital Cost ($/kW, without IDC, in mid-1979 steam-plant dollars) =  
Regression Coefficient ~egression Coefficient  
For Boiler Order Date For Completion Date  
18.7/16.8 X  
I. 15/l. I I if Northeast x  
1.26/1.27 if West x  
.76/.75 if South Central x  
.86/.87 if Southeast (not Southern  
Company) x  
. 73/.75 if Southern Company x  
I. 18/1. 17 if American Electric Power x  
.91/.89 if Multiple unit x  
1.25/1.26 if Scrubber x  
( 1.044/!.042) Year  
r' = .677/.683  
Adjusted r2 = .649/.656  
Fvalue = 24.7125.4  
Sample size = I 16 units  
Significance  
T-ratio Level(%)  
4.!6/4.52 99.9+  
1.85/1.41 93.2/83.9  
5.51/5.80 99.9+  
4.55/4.78 99.9+  
3.06/2.94 99.7/99.6  
5.77/5.50 99.9+  
2.26/2.14 97.4/96.6  
3.05/3.71 99.7/99.9+  
4.65/4.88 99.9+  
4.25/4.52 99.9+  
Year is last two digits of year of boiler order or commercial completion. e.g .. July  
1969 is 69.5.  
of the temporal cost increase previously accounted for by scrubbers has been  
incorporated into the sector size variable.  
This model is attractive because it implies that scrubbers are not a  
one-time cost but are a manifestation of an ongoing process, related to expan­sion of the coal sector, that continuously increases the requirements and  
therefore the costs of control equipment for coal plants. The frequency of  
scrubber units is sufficiently low, however, even near the end of the sample.  
that costs calculated with this model are unrealistically low- even for plants  
projected for the late I 980s- compared to costs calculated with models which  
Chapter9 221 Table9.6  
Coal Capital Cost Regression,  
Alternative Model Without Scrubber Variable  
Capital Cost ($/kW, without IDC, in mid-1979 steam-plant dollars) =  
.0124 X  
1.22 ifNonheast x  
I .25 if West x  
.85 if Southeast (not Southern Company) x  
. 75 if South Central x  
. 7 I if Southern Company x  
I. 14 if American Electric Power x  
. 90 if Multiple unit x  
(Cumulative Coal Capacity)·"'  
r 2 = .608  
Adjusted r2 = .578  
Fvalue = 20.7  
Sample size= I 16 units  
Significance  
T-ratio Level(%)  
2.54 98.7  
2.45 98.4  
4.83 99.9+  
3.05 99.7  
4.49 99.9+  
5.96 99.9+  
1.70 90.7  
3.09 99.7  
5.94 99.9+  
measure scrubber costs separately and explicitly assign scrubbers to standard  
plants.  
Section 9.2: Coal Plant Project Durations  
This section describes the statistical analysis of coal plant project dura­tions - the time interval between the date the boiler was ordered and the date  
the utility declared the unit commercially operational. These data were com­piled from the Kidder Peabody data base and from EIA data, respectively (see  
Reference I). Project duration spans a longer interval than construction dura­tion, the variable measured in the reactor duration analysis in Chapter 8. since  
it includes any time between boiler order and start of construction (the latter  
data were unavailable for coal units).  
In order to obtain an unbiased sample, the data base was truncated from  
222 Chapter9 the I I 6 units in the cost analysis to the 92 units ordered between January I 968  
and July 1972. The first ten units in the cost sample, all ordered before 1968.  
are biased toward longer project durations because concurrently ordered units  
that took less time to construct were completed prior to the 1 anuary !972 data  
base threshold and thus are not in the sample. Similarly, the last 14 units in the  
cost sample, all ordered after July 1972, were constructed in a shorter time  
than concurrently ordered units that were not completed before the December  
1977 data base cut-off.  
The project durations of the 92 units are significantly correlated with five  
explanatory variables. All but one, unit size, were significant in the cost  
analysis. The five variables together explain 41% of the variance in project  
duration. Although this r2 value is far below that of the nuclear duration  
analysis and the nuclear and coal cost analyses, all five explanatory variables  
are significant to approximately the 99% level or beyond, and all correlate  
logically with construction time. The variables and correlations are shown in  
Table 9. 7 and described below.  
I. Unit Size: This variable had by far the most significant correlation  
with project duration, well beyond the 99.9% level. A doubling of unit size  
extended project duration by 13%, adding, for example, seven months to the  
55-month duration of a typical 500-MW unit ordered midway through the  
sample period. The 95% confidence interval ranges from an 8% increase to an  
18% increase per size doubling.  
The 13% increase in coal project time parallels the 18% construction  
time increase for nuclear plants from doubled unit size. Both result from the  
increased quantities and sizes of material and equipment required to build  
larger plants, although the effect was significantly greater for nuclear.  
2. Cumulative Coal Capacity (Coal Sector Size): The increase in coal  
project durations in the 1970s is captured here by a variable representing  
cumulative coal capacity, as was done for coal capital costs in the previous  
section. The result is that the rate of increase in project time was pwportional  
to the .53 power of coal sector size. At this rate, doubling the coal sector would  
increase project length by 44%. The significance level is 99.8%, and the 95%  
confidence range is a 15-80% lengthening of duration per doubling.  
Based on this relationship, a 25% average increase in project duration  
was associated with the 53% expansion of the coal sector during the sample  
period. By the end of 1978, project time had increased by a year from the 50  
months required for a typical 500-MW plant completed in early 1972. This  
increase may have resulted primarily from the increasing scope of environ­mental reviews prior to construction rather than from any increase in construc­tion time. This conclusion is suggested by the lack of a correlation between  
project duration and use of scrubbers, discussed below, and by the expansion  
in pre-construction environmental reviews during the early 1970s.  
Chapter9 223 Table 9.7  
Coal Project Duration Regression Equation  
Project Duration (in months) =  
.0317 X  
MW· 178 x  
(Cumulative Coal Capacity)·'" x  
.88 if Southeast (not Southern Company) x  
.86 if Southern Company x  
1.08 if Duplicate  
r2 .415  
Adjusted r' = .38 I  
F value 12.2  
Sample size = 92 units  
Significance  
T·ratio Level(%)  
2.94 99.6  
5.53 99.9+  
3.23 99.8  
2.65 99.0  
3.27 99.8  
2.56 98.8  
All pairwise correlation coefficients have an absolute value less than .21.  
3-4. Southeast Location and the Southern Company: Project duration  
was shorter for coal plants in the Southeast, especially those operated by the  
Southern Company, as Table 9.8 shows. The rapid construction of Southeast  
plants probably resulted from favorable weather for construction and less  
detailed environmental reviews (although Texas-Oklahoma location did not  
affect project length, despite similar characteristics). Curiously, Southeast  
nuclear plants required longer to construct than Midwest reactors.  
5. Duplicate Units: Thirty-two of the 92 sample plants are duplicates  
-the second (or later) in a set of identical units at a·single site. They required  
8% more project time than other units; this finding is significant at the 98.8%  
level, with a 2-15% 95% confidence spread. It reflects a deliberate decision to  
complete duplicate units one to two years after the initial unit in order to  
optimize the use of common labor and construction facilities and to co-ordinate  
capacity expansion with system demand. Since duplicate and initial units are  
usually ordered within a year of each other (and sometimes simultaneously),  
intentional later completion causes project duration to be greater for duplicate  
224 Chapter9 Table 9.8  
Coal Cost Correlations To Company Variables  
Effect On 9$'i;c Confidence Significance Number of Plants/  
Factor Duration Interval Level(%) Share Of Total Sample -- 
Southern Co. -14% -22% to -6% 99.8o/r 10/11%  
Other Southeast -12% -20% to -3o/c 99.0% 9/10%  
All Southeast -13% -!9%to-7% 99.9+ 19/21%  
Sample shares were computed on the basis of 92 plants in duration analysis.  
units than for other units.  
Non-Significant Variables: Coal project duration was not significantly  
correlated with other variables that affected costs: location in Texas/Okla­homa, operation by American Electric Power, or use of scrubbers. Scrubbers  
apparently added 4% to project time, but this result had only 52% significance  
and thus is not remotely conclusive. Moreover, of the last 14 units in the cost  
sample that were exclttded from the duration analysis, the six units with  
scrubbers had a 5% shorter average project time than the eight non-scrubber  
units ordered in the same period (calculation includes adjustment for unit size  
differences). Other variables not correlated with costs - cooling towers,  
high-pressure boilers, and coal heat content, also were not linked With project  
time.  
Three other variables came dose to statistical significance in affecting  
project duration. Western plants averaged 7% shorter duration, with 90%  
significance. Northeast plants averaged 13% longer project time, but there  
were only three in the truncated sample and the correlation had only 84%  
significance. Publicly-owned coal units had a 7% longer project time, with  
90% significance. This result may reflect different financial incentives: in­vestor-owned utilities earn little or nothing on construction expenditures until  
the completed plant enters the rate base, whereas publicly-owned utilities may  
have less incentive to press for completion since they can raise their rates.  
during construction. The regression equation adding these three variables had  
an r2 of47%.  
Chapter9 225 References  
I. DOE. Inventory of Power Plams in the United States. DOE/RA-0001 (December  
1977); EIA, Steam-Electric Plant Construction Costs and Annual Production Expenses. annual;  
Kidder Peabody, Inc., .. Reports on Electric Utility Generating Equipment," annuaL  
2. EIA (see Reference I).  
3. C. Komanoff, Power Plant Performance (Council on Economic Priorities, New York.  
NY, 1976).  
4. LC. Bupp et al .. Trends in Light Water Reactor Capital Costs in the United States:  
Causes and Consequences, CAP 74-8 (Center for Policy Alternatives, MIT, Cambridge, MA,  
1974). Abridged in Technology Review. 77 (No.2), 15-25 ( 1975).  
5. AEP's coal-fired units over 600 MW averaged 14% higher capacity factors (9 percent­age points) than comparable units of other utilities during 1967-73. See Power Plant Per·  
formance (Reference 3), p. 84.  
6. See Chapter 8, Reference 5,  
226 Chapter9 10  
Changes In Nuclear  
And Coal Capital Costs  
And Construction  
Durations  
This chapter calculates the capital costs and construction durations of  
standard nuclear and coal plants completed at three different times:  
• the end of 1971, representing actual costs and durations at the  
beginning of the nuclear and coal samples;  
• the end of 1978, representing actual costs and durations at the  
conclusion of the samples;  
• the end of !988, representing projected costs and durations at  
the likely completion date of the last nuclear plants currently  
holding construction permits.  
These costs and construction durations are shown in Tables and Figures  
10. I and I 0.2. They were calculated from the nuclear and coal capital cost and  
construction duration regression equations in Chapters 8 and 9, using the  
characteristics of the hypothetical standard plants developed below. This  
chapter explains the procedures used, compares the effects of the various  
causal factors on cost and construction time, and assesses uncertainty in the  
results.  
Section 10.1: Hypothetical Standard Plants  
Using the regression equations developed in the previous two chapters  
for the costs and construction times of nuclear and coal plants, one can measure  
actual, past changes in the costs and schedules of plants during the 1971-78  
sample period and project changes in the costs and schedules of future plants.  
Chapter 10 227 Table 10.1  
Capital Costs Of Standard Plants  
(in mid-1979 steam-plant dollars, with real IDC)  
Nuclear  
Coal  
Nuclear/Coal Ratio  
Increase Over Previous Period  
Nuclear  
Coal  
Implied Annual Increase Rate  
Nuclear  
Coal  
Actual  
1971 1978  
$366/kW S8871kW  
$346/kW 5583/kW  
1.06 1.52  
142%  
68%  
13.5%  
7.7%  
1978 and 1988 coal costs include SOz scrubber.  
Projected  
1988  
SJ374/kW  
$794/kW  
I. 73  
55%  
36%  
4.5%  
3.1%  
1988 projected nuclear cost includes no allowance for special impact ofThree Mile  
Island accident.  
To do so it is necessary to posit ''standard'' plants whose characteristics can be  
.applied to the regression equations.  
There are two ways to select the characteristics of standard plants. The  
obvious method is to develop composite plant characteristics from the data  
samples. This approach would lead to misleading nuclear and coal compari­sons, however, because the two samples have different characteristics. For  
example, Northeast plants comprise 30% of the nuclear sample but only 4% of  
the coal sample. Since Northeast plants cost considerably more than other  
plants, a composite nuclear plant would be disadvantaged in a comparison with  
a composite coal plant.  
Considerations such as this make it necessary to base cost and duration  
calculations on hypothetical standard plants. Table 10.3 on page 232 specifies  
such plants for three different periods: the end of 1971 , at the beginning of the  
sample period; the end of 1978, at the end of the sample period; and the end of  
1988, the date at which a recently licensed nuclear plant could probably be  
228 Chapter 10 Table 10.2  
Construction Times Of Standard Plants  
(in months)  
Actual Projected  
1971 1978 1988  
Nuclear 65.8 77.7 97.3  
Coal 52.7 60.6 73.3  
Nuclear/Coal Ratio 1.25 1.28 1.33  
Increase Over Previous Period  
Nuclear 18% 25%  
Coal 15% 2l%  
Implied Annual increase Rate  
Nuclear 2.4% 2.3%  
Coal 2.0% 1.9%  
Nuclear durations extend from construction permit to commercial operation; coal  
durations extend from boiler orderto commercial operation.  
1988 projected nuclear duration includes no allowance for special impact of Three  
Mile Island accident  
completed (based on 197!-78 schedule trends exclusive of the Three Mile  
Island accident). Nuclear and coal plants are assumed to have the same  
geographical composition in each period but are not necessarily identical in  
other respects.  
The entries in the table are explained below:  
I. Sector Size: Cost escalation and schedule lengthening at nuclear  
and coal plants were modelled in the preceding chapters by correlating costs  
and construction times to the sizes of the respective nuclear and coal sectors.  
The rationale was that as cumulative sector generating capacity (sector size)  
increases, so do environmental and safety criteria which strongly affect design  
and construction requirements and costs.  
As explained in Chapter 9, coal sector size is estimated at 142,000  
megawatts (MW) for the standard plant at the end of 1971, and 217,348 MW  
Chapter 10 229 Figure 10.1  
Power Plant Capital Costs  
(in !979 steam-plant $/kW, with real interest during construction)  
Ocoal 1374  
• Nuclear  
Costs were synthesized by applying nuclear and coal cost regressions to .. standard plants .. as  
described in text. Costs of 1971 and I 978 plants are relatively independent of the regression  
model employed. 1978 and 1988 coal plants include scrubbers.  
for the standard plant at the end of 1978.a For the late-1988 plant, a value of  
346,516 MW was calculated by assuming annual net capacity additions of  
12,917 MW, equal to 120% of average net coal additions in 1972-78. The  
additional 20% is intended to reflect both coal's greater share of future fossil  
plants and a decline in total fossil additions due to reduced load growth.  
Cumulative nuclear capacity just prior to the construction permit award  
for the first reactor in the data base is calculated at 9800 MW. This figure  
includes all 15 commercial-size reactors already with construction permits but  
excludes small (200 MW or less) reactors. These belong to an earlier era from  
a. The latter figure is actually total coal capacity ordered through 1973 and installed  
through 1978. Since the order for the last 1977·completed coal unit in the sample followed the  
orders for all units installed through 1978. the 217.348 MW figure encompasses all coal units  
installed through 1978.  
230 Chapter 10 Year Completed  
Figure 10.2  
Power Plant Construction Durations  
(in years)  
Ocoal  
.Nuclear  
1971 1978  
8.1  
1988  
(projected)  
Durations are measured from construction permit award (nuclear) or boiler order (coal) to  
commercial service date. They were synthesized by applying nuclear and coal duration regres­sions to "standard plants" as described in text. Durations of 1971 and 1978 plants are relatively  
independent of model employed.  
both design and regulatory standpoints. The sector grew to 55,573 MW with  
construction permit awards for 52 additional reactors: the 46 completed  
through 1978 which comprise the data base, and six others licensed concur­rently which had not reached commercial operation by the end of 1978.  
Sector size for the standard nuclear plant completed at the end of 1988  
was calculated by summing the capacities of all plants with NRC construction  
permits through 1978, the 15 pre-sample plants, and the 46 in the sample. The  
resulting figure of 149,648 MW represents a 169% expansion from the 55,573  
MW sector size for 1978, and a 14-fold increase from the pre-sample capacity  
of 9800 MW. Acutal 1988 capacity could be less if the negative net ordering  
rate for nuclear plants persists. The figure used here has so far been virtually  
unaffected, however, by recent cancellations; these have befallen primarily  
plants on order rather than those with construction permits. (The sensitivity  
analysis in the next section shows the effect of varying this assumption.)  
Chapter 10 231 Table 10.3  
Characteristics Of Standard· Plants  
1971-78 Sample Average Hyp.othetical Standard Plant  
Nuclear Coal  
Nuclear Coal 1971 1978 1988 1971 1978 1988 - -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Sector Size, MW 23,337 175,680 9,800 55,573 149,648 142,000 217,348 346,516  
Unit Size, MW 831 560 820 840 1,150 708 439 300  
A-E Experience 4 2 7.5 18  
Multiple Unit .48 .72 .50 .45 .80 .72 .72 .80  
Duplicate Unit .31 .36 .32 .27 .50 .36 .36 .50  
Scrubber .13 0  
Cooling Tower .40 .40 .40 .50  
Northeast .30 .04 .20 17 .14 .20 .17 .14  
AEP .04 .03 .03 .03  
Southeast .39 '19 .15 .15 .17 .15 .15 .17  
South Central 0 .07 .05 .09 .09  
West .04 .17 .II .22 .22  
Midwest (Base) .27 .49 .46 .34 .35  
B&WNSSS .17 17 .17 0  
- Figures are unit averages. except geometric means for continuous variables.  
Southeast figures shown for coal include Southern Company: .09 in 1971-78 sample, and .07, .07, and .06 for standard plants. 2. Unit Size: Larger nuclear and coal units took longerto build, larger  
nuclear units cost less, and coal costs were unaffected by unit size in the  
I 97 I -78 data samples. The average nuclear unit in the sample is 830 MW ,band  
the typical plant size increased less than 3% during the sample period, based on  
the correlation between reactor size and construction permit date. Reactor  
sizes are increasing significantly, however, and I 150 MW is representative of  
plants that will come on line in the late 1980s.  
Coal plant sizes actually decreased during the sample period, contrary to  
popular belief. A regression of unit size on boiler order date indicates that the  
typical size of new coal plants was 708 MW for 1971 completion and only 439  
MW at the end of l978.c Extrapolation of this trend would project new coal  
units averaging 260 MW in the late eighties. A more realistic estimate, taking  
into account utility attitudes, is 300 MW.  
3. Architect-Engineer (A-E) Experience: This variable applies only to  
nuclear plants. The A-E numbers used here reflect the plant being considered,  
plus all previously licensed commercial-size reactors, including the !5 ex­cluded from the data base.d They range from one to 23, the latter for the last  
plant built by Bechtel, which built 19 of the 46 plants. The other 27 plants were  
built by nine other A-Es (excluding utilities that designed their own units).  
The average A-E number (geometric mean) increased from two at the  
start of the sample to 7.5 at the end of 1978. Expansion of the nuclear sector to  
include all plants with construction permits would raise the average figure to  
18. Note that A-E experience is measured by project, not total capacity built,  
since each project is a learning experience.  
4-5. Multiple and Duplicate Units: Identical multiple units have lower  
costs in both the nuclear and coal analyses. Although the percentage of  
multiple nuclear units fell slightly in the sample period, an increase from 45%  
in 1978 to 80% is assumed for future plants, reflecting the growing tendency of  
utilities to construct twin-unit stations. Cancellations of second units for  
financial reasons would reduce this figure, however. The share of multiple coal  
units is assumed to rise slightly from the current 72% to 80%, matching the  
value projected for nuclear plants. With coal units sizes falling, most coal units  
will be installed as multiple units. The percentage of duplicate units (the  
second or more in a multiple set), is relevant only to calculating construction  
b, This geometic mean is used in preference to the artithmetic mean because of the  
logarithmic regression form employed. The arithmetic mean of nuclear unit size in the data  
sample is 854 MW.  
c. The regression·bas a weak r' value, only 8%. but the MW coefficient is significant  
beyond the 99% level.  
• d. Also included is the Hanford plutonium production reactor, with a net electrical output  
of800 MW, built by A-E Burns & Roe.  
Chapter 10 233 duration. It is assumed to be slightly over half that of multiple units.  
6. Scrubbers: Only I 3% of the coal units in the data sample ( 15 of 116)  
have scrubbers. All coal plants whose construction started after September 18,  
1978 must have scrubbers, however, regardless of coal sulfur content, so the  
1988 coal plant is assumed to include a scrubber. A scrubber is also specified  
for the 1978 standard plam, ensuring that 1978 coal plants are costed for  
state-of-the-art pollution controls for a conservative comparison with recent  
reactor costs. In reality, however, only about half of coal plants installed in the  
late 1970s have scrubbers (the others use low-sulfur coal to meet the New  
Source Performance Standard for S02).  
7. Cooling Towers: This variable significantly affected nuclear costs  
and duration but had no apparent effect on coal costs or scheduling. The 40%  
penetration for cooling towers in the nuclear sample is assumed to increase to  
50% for future plants, reflecting both increasing regulatory stringency and  
greater load growth in interior regions requiring closed-cycle cooling systems,  
relative to coastal areas where once-through systems are the norm.  
8. Geographical Location: The considerable differences in geograph­ical composition between the nuclear and coal samples make it necessary to  
specify compromise standard plants. The nuclear sample is dominated by  
Northeast plants (30%) and Southeast plants (39% of the cost sample, 41% of  
the construction duration sample). Only 4% and 19% of coal plants installed in  
1972-77 are in these regions, respectively. Conversely, 20% of installed coal  
plants, but only 5% of the nuclear plants, are in the West or South Central  
regions. The coal plants in the study sample are also concentrated more in the  
Midwest than are the nuclear plants, by 53% to 26%. These figures reflect  
perceived regional nuclear and coal cost advantages. Although regional differ­ences persist, they must be excised from the standard plant to prevent bias in  
comparing costs.  
The geographical characteristics specified for 1971 and 1978 are a rough  
mix of the nuclear and coal samples. For the 1988 plant they are the estimated  
future shares of new utility construction. The Northeast contribution is set at  
20% in 1971 and 17% in 1978, declining to 14% in 1988 because of low  
regional load growth. The West's share is assumed to double from II% in 1971  
to 22% in 1988 because of rapid growth. Other geographical percentages are  
shown in Table !0.3.  
Section 10.2: Changes In Capital Costs  
Table 10.1 on page 228 and Figure 10.1 on page 230 give the costs of  
standard nuclear and coal plants installed in (late) 1971, !978 and 1988. These  
234 Chapter 10 costs were calculated by applying the nuclear and coal cost regression equa­tions (Tables 8. l and 9. l) to the characteristics of the standard plants in Table  
10.3. The costs include "real" (inflation-adjusted) interest during construc­tion (IDC) accounting for between 6% and !5% of total plant cost. The method  
for calculating IDC is described in Section I 0.4.  
Table 10.1 demonstrates that real escalation in nuclear capital costs far  
exceeded coal capital cost escalation during the period from l97lto !978. The  
percentage increase in nuclear capital costs, 142%, was slightly overtwice that  
for coal, 68%, even though the entire brunt of the addition of scrubbers has  
been assigned to the 197!-78 period. The annual real rate of nuclear cost  
escalation, 13.5%, was 75% greater than that of coal escalation, 7.7%. (The  
latter figure includes the effect of scrubbers. Without scrubbers, the 1971-78  
real increase in coal capital costs was 33%, or4.2% per year.) As a result, the  
gap between nuclear and coal capital costs increased dramatically: from only  
6% in 1971 without scrubbers to 52% in 1978 with scrubbers.  
The table also shows that the annual rate of capital cost escalation will  
slow significantly in the next decade if 1971-78 cost relationships continue,  
falling to about one-third of the past annual rate. Nevertheless, both the  
nuclear and coal cost increases would be substantial, about 90% as great as the  
197 I -78 increases in absolute terms, because escalation will build from a  
larger base. The capital cost of a standard nuclear plant would then be 73%  
greater than the comparable coal capital cost by 1988. These projections make  
no allowance for the Three Mile Island accident, which, as Chapter 6 shows,  
appears likely to have a substantial additional impact on future nuclear costs.  
Table 10.4 traces actual past and projected future nuclear and coal cost  
increases to changes in the factors that correlated significantly with capital  
costs in the regression equations. The table shows that cost changes associated  
with changes in plant characteristics other than scrubbers during 1971-78 were  
hardly noticeable next to the cost increases associated with expansion of the  
nuclear and coal sectors. Changes in common status, cooling tower use, and  
geographical location affected the costs of standard nuclear and coal plants by  
only 1% or less. This was due to both the modest correlation between changes  
in these factors and costs and to the fact that the standard plants changed little  
in the factor values. Projecting over the entire 197!-88 period, increases in  
architect-engineer experience and unit size will reduce nuclear costs by 2 I%  
and 7%, respectively. But these factors will be overwhelmed by escalation  
associated with nuclear sector expansion, which added 172% to nuclear costs  
from 1971 to 1978 and will cause a total 1971-88 cost increase of382%, based  
on past trends.  
Uncertainty Analysis: The 1988 cost projections in Table 10.1 are  
subject to several sources of uncertainty. One is the possibility that the  
underlying trends which brought about the 197!-78 cost escalation will per­form differently in the future. Chapters 5 and 6 suggest that future nuclear  
Chapter 10 235 236  
Table 10.4  
Components Of Capital Cost Escalation  
Actual Projected  
1971·78 1978·88 1971-88  
Changes in Nuclear Plants  
Multiple Unit + 1/z% + 4% 3%  
Cooling Tower Use + 2% + 2%  
Northeast Location 1% 1% - 2%  
A-E Experience 13% 9% -21%  
Unit Size lh% 6% - 7%  
Nuclear Sector Size +172% +77% +382%  
Real !DC + 3%- + 5% + 8%  
Net Nuclear Escalation +142% +55% +275%  
Changes in Coal Plants  
Scrubber +26% +26%  
Multiple Unit - 1% - 1%  
Geographical Location + \(i% + Vz%  
Coal Sector Size +30% +33% +73%  
Real !DC + 2% + 3% + 5%  
Net Coal Escalation +68% +36% +129%  
Figures indicate changes in costs attributable to changes in standard plant char­acteristics shown in Table 10.3. For example. Northeast location adds to nuclear  
costs but it is declining in frequency and thus appears in table as a negative change  
in costs. Cost factors are given in Tables 8.! for nuclear and 9. I for coal.  
Percentages are combined multiplicatively. For example, the combined effect of  
increased nuclear A-E experience in 1971-88 is calculated by multiplying .87  
(from- 13% in 1971-78) and .9 I (from -9% in 1978-88), yielding. 79, or -21%.  
Reai!DC is the inflation-adjusted cost of interest during construction. It reflects  
construction duration and the real cost of capital and is calculated in Section 10.4.  
Chapter 10 regulatory standards, and thus costs, are likely to increase more rapidly in the  
future than is indicated by past trends. But even if trends adhere precisely to  
their past course, two other sources of uncertainty would remain in the cost  
projection methodology. One is uncertainty in the future rate of expansion of  
the nuclear and coal sectors; the other is the uncertainty inherent in the  
measurement of factors affecting costs.  
Nuclear and coal sector sizes play a central part in projecting costs since  
they have been assigned the role of explaining the increases in costs over time  
resulting from increased environmental and safety standards. According to  
trends inferred from !97!-78 data, doubling sector sizes would raise costs by  
53% for coal and by 49% for nuclear. Because the nuclear sector is consider­ably smaller than the coal sector, comparable capacity additions should have a  
far greater impact on nuclear costs. The projected 94 gigawatt (GW) expansion  
of the nuclear sector from 1978 to 1988 is far larger in percentage terms than  
the estimated 129 GW increase in coal capacity over the same period, so that  
nuclear costs should rise more sharply than coal plant costs.  
The effect on projected costs of varying anticipated sector growth is  
shown in Table I 0. 5. The table indicates that both nuclear and coal future costs  
are not overly sensitive to the rate of expansion of their respective sectors. The  
effect on costs is approximately one-third as great as the variation from the  
assumed increase in sector capacity for nuclear, and one-fifth for coaL (The  
effect appears greater if measured against the increase in costs from 1978 to  
J 988.) Thus the rates of increase in nuclear and coal capacity could differ  
considerably from those assumed in defining the 1988 standard plants without  
drastically changing projected costs.  
Uncertainty in projecting future costs from past trends also arises from  
statistical uncertainty in measuring the rate at which sector expansion affects  
costs. The regression coefficients used to calculate costs are merely estimates  
of the most likely values of the various factors affecting costs. The factors may  
actually be stronger or weaker than the values assumed, causing actual costs to  
differ from the calculated figures.  
This uncertainty may be estimated by applying the "95% confidence  
intervals'' of the coefficients for sector expansion reported in Chapters 8 and 9.  
For example, while the best estimate is that coal costs increase with the .6 I  
power of coal sector size, there is 95% likelihood that the rate of cost increase  
falls between the .34 and .89 powers of sector size. This range and an  
analogous range for the nuclear sector coefficient are used to produce Table  
10.6. The table indicates that there is only modest statistical uncertainty  
associated with the sector size variables used to project future nuclear or coal  
costs.  
Results of Alternative Regression Models: Several alternative statisti­cal models of nuclear and coal capital costs were described in Chapters 8 and 9.  
It is of interest to calculate the costs that these models yield for 1988 plants.  
Chapter 10 237 Table 10.5  
Effect On Projected 1988 Costs  
Of Varying 1978-88 Sector Growth  
Nuclear Coal  
1978 Sector Size 55.573 MW 217,348MW  
1988 Projected Sector Size 149.648MW 346,516MW  
1978-88 Projected Growth 94,075MW 129,168MW  
Effect on 1988 Cost of Varying  
1978-88 Growth by:  
-50% -17% -12%  
-25% - 8% - 6%  
-10% - 3% 2%  
+10% + 3% - 2%  
+25% + 7% + 5 1 
h%  
+50% +14% +11%  
In calculating nuclear costs, the increase in A-E experience was prorated according  
to the variation in 1978-88 sector growth. Calculations do not reflect the additional  
minor effect of sector size on cost through its impact on construction duration.  
They also omit effect on cost of reduced percentage of multiple units if duplicate  
units are disproponionately cancelled.  
A nuclear cost model in which cost increases over time are explained by  
growth in cumulative reactor operating experience as well as increases in  
sector size is presented in Table 8.3. The model was rejected because the  
variable denoting operating experience was not statistically significant and  
because the two explanatory variables were very highly correlated. The model  
is nevertheless attractive because it explicitly recognizes the role played by  
operating experience in engendering new regulatory standards and higher  
costs. When it is applied to a 1988 standard plant,< it yields a calculated cost of  
e. Cumulative operating experience for the 1988 plant is assumed to be 1400 reactor·  
years. This is based on 218 commercial reactor-years realized through June 1977, when the last  
data base plant was awarded an operating license, and assumed linear growth over the ensuing II  
years from 60 plants in 1977 to the 150 currently operating or with construction permits.  
238 Chapter 10 Table 10.6  
Sensitivity Of Projected 1988 Costs  
To Uncertainty In Effect of Sector Size  
95% Confidence Range Relative  
To Base Cost Projections  
High Range  
Low Range  
Nuclear  
+ 9<;<  
- 8%  
Coal  
+14%  
-12%  
Figures were calculated by applying confidence intervals to the projected sector  
sizes for 1988 standard plants. Interval for coal sector cost effect is .335 to .894:  
effect for nuclear sector ranges from .491 to .664.  
$1450/kilowatt (kW), including real interest during construction (!DC), 6%  
more than the $1374/kW cost adopted here based on the regression with sector  
size alone.  
Table 9.6 presents a coal cost model without a variable denoting use of  
scrubbers, in which all temporal cost increases are represented by growth in  
sector size. This model yields a 1988 coal plant cost projection of $773/kW  
with real IDC, 3% less than the $794/kW cost calculated from the model  
including the scrubber variable. Although cost is more sensitive to sector size  
in the model without scrubbers, its steeper slope is not enough to offset the  
large (26%) "one-time" cost impact of scrubbers in the model used here,  
based on the assumed 1988 coal sector size of 34 7 GW f  
The other alternative models portray nuclear and coal costs as a function  
of time: reactor construction permit (CP) date, coal boiler order date, and coal  
plant completion date. They show nuclear costs increasing at 24% per year of  
CP date and coal costs rising at a little over 4% annually (exclusive of the  
impact of scrubbers). These rates are the product of the particular measure­ment conventions employed and are not meaningful for representing past cost  
increases. They differ substantially from the annual escalation rates synthe­sized from the regressions applied to the 1971 and 1978 standard plants - 
13.5% for nuclear, 7.7% for coal - shown in Table 10.1. Future costs  
calculated from the alternative models would be unrealistically high for  
nuclear plants and low for coal plants. Moreover, there is not a sufficient basis  
for extending past annual percentage rates of cost increase into the future.  
f. The breakeven point for the two models is approximately 385 GW of coal capacity.  
Chapter lO 239 Section 10.3: Changes In Construction Durations  
Table I 0.2 on page 229 and Figure 10.2 on page 231 give the nuclear  
construction times and coal plant project times of standard plants installed in  
(late) 1971, 1978 and 1988. These figures were calculated by applying the  
nuclear and coal duration regression equations (Tables 8.4 and 9. 7) to the  
characteristics of the standard plants in Table 10.3. Nuclear construction time  
extends from construction permit award to declared commercial operation:  
coal project time extends from boiler order date, which precedes or coincides  
with construction start, to commercial operation. (For convenience, coal  
project duration is sometimes referred to below as construction duration.)  
Table I 0. 2 demonstrates that construction times increased moderately  
over the 1971-78 period: by 18% for nuclear, 15% for coal. The difference  
between typical nuclear and coal construction times increased slightly during  
this period, from !3 months to 17 months.  
The table also shows that if 1971-78 construction duration relationships  
continue during the 1980s, construction times will increase at about the same  
annual rates as in the past- 2'12% for nuclear (or about two months per year),  
and 2% for coal (about l'h months per year). The construction time for a  
standard nuclear plant would then be one-third greater than for coal, or two  
years longer, by 1988. It would take 48% longer to complete a nuclear plant at  
that time than in 1971 , and 39% longer for a coal plant.  
These findings probably overstate construction times for coal plants  
since they are based on data for project time, as explained above. Actual coal  
construction time is generally slightly less than total project time. More  
importantly, some of the apparent 1971-78 growth in coal plant construction  
times that is extrapolated here into the eighties may have resulted from  
increases in licensing time. Conversely, the nuclear projections make no  
allowance for the Three Mile Island accident, which is likely to cause substan­tial stretch-outs of future nuclear construction, as Chapter 6 shows.  
Table I 0. 7 traces the actual past and projected future increases in con­struction times to changes in the factors that correlated significantly with  
construction time in the regression equations. The table indicates that unit size,  
sector size, and nuclear architect-engineer experience have been the only  
factors causing significant changes in construction durations. Over the entire  
1971-88 period, sector expansion is projected to effect approximately equal  
increases in nuclear and coal construction durations- 66% and 60%, respec­tively. Nuclear expansion, however, brings about an increase in architect­engineer experience leading to a 22% projected reduction in construction time  
from 197 I to 1988. Accordingly, nuclear expansion has a lesser overall impact  
than coal expansion on construction time.  
240 Chapter 10 Table 10.7  
Components Of Construction Lengthening  
Actual Projected  
1971-78 1978-88 1971-88  
Changes in Nuclear Plants  
Duplicate Status - l% + 4% + 3%  
Cooling Tower + 1% + 1%  
A-E Experience -14% - 9% -22%  
Unit Size + 1% +12% +13%  
Nuclear Sector Size +38% +20% +66%  
Net Nuclear Construction  
Lengthening +18% +25% +48%  
Changes in Coal Plants  
Unit Size - 8% - 7% -14%  
Coal Sector Size +25% +28% +60%  
Net Coal Construction  
Lengthening + 1.5% +21% +39%  
Figures indicate changes in standard plant durations attributable to changes in  
standard plant characteristics shown in Table 10.3. Construction length factors are  
given in Tables 8.4 for nuclear and 9. 7 for coal.  
Factors with less than I% impact on duration are not shown. They are duplicate  
status for coal, and Northeast and Southeast location for both coal and nuclear.  
Babcock & Wilcox NSSS is reflected in 1971 and 1978 nuclear durations but not  
1988.  
Percentages are combined multiplicatively. See note to Table 10.4.  
Chapter lO 241 The major difference between I 97 I -88 nuclear and coal construction  
time trends is that the 40% increase in typical nuclear unit sizes will add I 3%  
to nuclear construction time, while the 58% decrease in typical coal sizes will  
reduce construction time by 14%. Coal construction times would be 27%  
greater if the standard !988 coal size matched nuclear at I I 50 MW rather than  
the projected 300 MW. Alternatively, nuclear construction times would be  
38% less at 300 MW than at I !50 MW. Since the projected 1988 nuclear  
construction time is 33% greater than that of coal, the difference is essentially  
attributable to the different plant sizes. The projected coal construction dura­tion is probably somewhat overstated, however, as described above.  
Uncertainty Analysis: Aside from the effect of variations from the  
assumed unit sizes, uncertainties in projecting 1988 construction durations  
may arise from questions pertaining to future nuclear and coal sector expansion  
rates. Increases in cumulative nuclear and coal capacity affect construction  
schedules in much the same way that they affect costs (although at a lower rate)  
by adding to the stringency of environmental and safety standards affecting  
design and construction work. Variations from the sector sizes assumed in  
specifying I 988 standard plants would alter the construction times projected in  
Table !0.2. These effects appear minor, however, particularly for nuclear  
plants, as Table I 0.8 shows. Nuclear plant durations are especially insensitive  
to the assumed sector size because of the slight relationship between duration  
and sector size for the data sample and the offsetting reduction in construction  
time from increased A-E experience as the nuclear sector expands.  
Uncertainty in projecting future construction schedules from past trends  
also arises from statistical uncertainty in the correlations of construction time  
to the sizes of the nuclear and coal sectors. As in the previous section, this  
uncertainty is estimated by applying the 95% confidence intervals of the  
regression coefficients for sector expansion. Table I 0. 9 indicates that statisti­cal uncertainty in the effect of sector size has only a modest bearing on  
projected construction times. The 95% confidence range is about plus-or­minus one year for both nuclear and coal plants.  
Section 10.4: Interest During Construction  
Utilities finance power plant construction by issuing bonds and selling  
stock. They must pay bond interest and stock dividends in order to satisfy legal  
obligations and retain investors' confidence. In many states, however, utilities  
are not permitted to earn revenue on new plants until they have been completed  
and enter the "rate base." As a result, utilities must raise additional capital to  
enable them to meet their interest and dividend requirements during construc­tion. The value of this capital is part of the total capital cost of plant construc­tion and is referred to as interest during construction, or IDC (or, alternatively,  
242 Chapter 10 Table 10.8  
Effect On Projected 1988 Construction Durations  
Of Varying 1978-88 Sector Growth  
Nuclear Coal  
1978 Sector Size 55.573 MW 217.348 MW  
1988 Projected Sector Size 149.648MW 346.516MW  
1978-88 Projected Growth 94.075MW 129.168MW  
Effect on 1988 Duration of Varying  
1978-88 Growth by:  
-50 'it -3% - IO'!t  
- 25'!t -l'it - 5o/c  
- IO'!t - 2%  
+10% + 2%  
+ 25'!t +I% + 5%  
+50% +2% + 9%  
Notes to Table 10.5 apply here.  
Table !0.9  
Sensitivity Of Projected 1988 Construction Times  
To Uncertainty In Effect Of Sector Size  
95% Confidence Range Relative  
To Base Schedule Projections  
High Range  
Low Range  
Nuclear  
+II%  
-10%  
Coal  
+16%  
-14%  
Figures were calculated by applying confidence intervals to the projected sector  
sizes for 1988 standard plants. Interval for coal sector duration effect is .203 to  
. 850: effect for nuclear sector ranges from .076 to .294.  
Chapter 10 243 Table 10.10  
Calculation Of Interest During Construction (IDC)  
Actual Projected  
1971 1978 1988  
Real Cost of Capital (per year)  
Nuclear 2.8% 3.3% 3.8%  
Coal 2.8% 3.3% 3.6%  
Construction Duration (months)  
Nuclear 65.8 77.7 97.3  
Coal 52.7 60.6 73.3  
!DC Increment to Cost  
Nuclear 8.0% 11.3% 16.8%  
Coal 6.3% 8.7% 11.6%  
!DC Share of Total Cost  
Nuclear 7 .4o/c 10.2% 14.4%  
Coal 5.9% 8.0% 10.4%  
Construction durations are from Table 10.2. Cost of capital is from Section 11.6.  
Nuclear construction durations used to calculate IDC conservatively exclude  
licensing time. reflecting author's belief that few expenditures predate construc­tion start.  
!DC was calculated with the ''Comtois formula":  
(I + e)N - ( 1 + i)N !DC Increment to Cost = N 1 1 /I . -I. where n ( + e + t)  
N =project time, years  
e = annual escalation rate (set equal to zero here  
to calculate real !DC)  
i = annttal cost of capital  
Although the Comtois formula was derived for projects with symmetric payout  
functions, it is applicable to typical actual nuclear and coal cash flow curves with  
very little error. See W.H. Comtois, "Escalation, Interest During Construction  
and Power Plant Schedules" (Westinghouse Power Systems Marketing, Septem­ber 1975).  
IDC increments to costs were added to direct costs calculated from regressions, to  
yield standard plant costs. in Table I 0. I. For example, direct nuclear cost for 1978  
standard plant was $797/kW. Increment of 11.3% gives total cost of $887/kW. AFUDC- allowance for funds used during construction)g  
!DC reflects the cost of tying up capital during construction. It is a  
genuine cost and has been included, in real terms, in the costs of standard  
plants in Table 10.1. The percentage of total costs contributed by !DC is  
determined by construction duration and the real cost of capital to utilities. The  
greater these are, the more capital is tied up unproductive!y at a cost to the  
utilities and society.  
IDC's contributions to the costs of the standard plants are shown in Table  
10.10. They were calculated on the basis of the construction durations of  
standard plants in Table 10.2 and the "real," inflation-adjusted cost of utility  
capital. Both factors increased during the 1970s and are anticipated to increase  
in the 1980s (see Section 11.6). The table shows that the contribution of !DC to  
plant cost rose by about 40% from 1971 to 1978 and is projected to double  
overall from 1971 to 1988. Nevertheless, Tables 10.4 and 10.10 both show  
that increases in IDC account for only a small fraction of real past and projected  
future increases in nuclear and coal costs. Accordingly, increases in construc­tion duration explain very little of real capital cost escalation (although their  
impact appears large when costs are calculated in current dollars).  
g. Some states now penn it utilities to add some of the capital cost to the rate base during  
construction, an allowance known as construction work in progress (CWIP). The resulting  
revenue obviates the need for IDC to the extent of. the allowance.  
Chapter !0 245 11  
Non-Capital  
Cost Factors  
This chapter considers factors other than capital costs which will affect  
the life-cycle generating costs of new nuclear and coal-fired plants: generating  
performance (capacity factor), fuel costs, operating and maintenance (O&M)  
costs, financing charges, and waste disposal and decommissioning costs.  
Estimated cost values for these are combined with forecasts of capital costs to  
yield projected total generating costs in Chapter 12.  
Several of these factors will either contribute heavily to total costs, or are  
highly uncertain, or both. The most problematic is probably coal fuel cost,  
which varies considerably among different regions and whose future cost  
increases are hard to predict. Nuclear plant capacity factors significantly affect  
generating costs and have been extremely volatile among different reactors,  
although the industry-wide average consistently appears to be within a narrow  
(55-65%) range. Conversely, nuclear fuel costs, coal capacity factors, and  
O&M costs have only a moderate bearing on total power costs and also appear  
more easily predictable than other cost factors.  
Although nuclear waste disposal and decommissioning costs will likely  
exceed utility and government estimates, they are unlikely to constitute a  
major part of nuclear costs (in constant dollars). Both costs are extremely  
uncertain at this time, however. Conversely, financing charges, which convert  
capital costs into annualized payment streams, are extremely important but are  
predictable with great precision.  
The discussions of the above cost factors are necessarily brief compared  
to the extensive treatment of capital costs in this study.  
Section 11.1: Nuclear Capacity Factors  
Capacity performance strongly affects nuclear power economics. A  
reactor running at a high capacity factor (electrical output as a percentage of  
plant design capability) accumulates considerable fuel cost savings. Under  
favorable circumstances, these will pay for the unit's construction vis-a-vis  
other electric-generating plants. Conversely, a utility with poorly performing  
reactors must build additional expensive nuclear capacity or forego much of  
246 Chapter II the fuel cost savings." For each successive ten percentage point drop in  
capacity factor below 80%, nuclear generating costs increase by II%, 13%,  
and 16%. (These figures are sequential and assume that non-variable ex­penses-capital, decommissioning, O&M, and interest on fuel costs­account for 80% of total costs. See Table 12.1.}  
Until the mid-1970s, utilities and the Atomic Energy Commission  
(AEC) generally assumed that nuclear plants would operate at 80% capacity  
factors. That target has not been met, of course, but it has probably been  
overused as a straw man by industry critics. Some existing reactors were built  
at low cost and have proven to be cheaper than power-generating alternatives,  
especially oil-firing, despite capacity factors as low as 50%. Most future  
nuclear plants, however, are likely to be uneconomical even at very high  
capacity factors because of huge construction costs. (A 78% nuclear capacity  
factor is needed for nuclear-coal breakeven for new plant construction-even  
without incorporating the Three Mile Island (TMI) accident into reactor costs  
-based on the cost figures in Table 12.!.)  
Most utilities now estimate that new reactors will achieve 70% capacity  
factors, although some projections are as low as 65%. In practice, however,  
U.S. reactors averaged only 60% capacity factor through mid-1980b and have  
demonstrated compelling reasons to expect that future plants will fail to attain  
even this average. For one thing, large reactors (800 megawatts [MW] or  
above) have had different performance characteristics than smaller units. For  
another, technical and safety-related constraints on reactor operation are  
apparently more than offsetting design and managerial efforts to improve  
performance.  
Past Performance Trends: The reactor performance record provides  
a. Some observers describe reactor shutdown costs in terms of both idle high-cost plant  
and expensive replacement power, but these effects are two sides of a single coin. Large bills for  
replacement power reflect not only reactor unreliability but also the high cost of fossil fuels.  
b. Historical plant-by-plant capacity factor data are presented in References 1-4. They  
employ original "design electrical ratings"-the same ratings used here to calculate per-kW  
capital costs-and include all commercial reactor experience (units over 400 MW) starting with  
each plant's first full calendar year. Most industry and government data employ different  
conventions. measuring capacity factors with reduced .. revised" design ratings or .. maximum  
dependable capability" (see Reference 2). In addition, NRC capacity factor tabulations have  
excluded Three Mile Island Unit 2 since late 1979. These deviations cause most industry and  
government performance averages to exceed those here by one to two percentage points.  
Separately, performance studies by the Electric Power Research Institute show that  
"load-following"-deliberate power reduction due to insufficient system demand-has cur­tailed nuclear power production by less than 1%. Capacity factor is thus an accurate index of  
potential nuclear performance. "Availability factors" often cited by industry measure only the  
percentage of time available for operating at any output, ignoring partial outages that have  
diminished reactor capacity factors by an average of approximately 12 percentage points. See  
Reference 5 for a dissection of availability factors.  
Chapter II 247 the most reliable basis for forecasting future capacity factors. To be sure, this  
record is merely the product of underlying causal factors: regulatory pressure  
to reduce reactor mishaps, the rate at which safety-related defects surface in  
operation, utility willingness to commit funds to improve performance, and  
the plants' intrinsic design and mechanical integrity. However, no study has  
managed to isolate the effects of these factors to date, much less gauge their  
future impacts. Performance data, moreover, indicate whether anticipated  
trends such as maturation (improvements with age) or learning (improvements  
with later reactor ''vintages'') have materialized.  
U.S. nuclear capacity factor experience is shown in Figure I 1.1 and  
Table 11. I. Figure II. I shows that reactor performance has failed to improve  
over time, in part because of a marked downturn after 1978 that coincided with,  
but was not solely attributable to, the Three Mile Island accident. Table 11.1  
points up the striking performance difference between large and small re­actors, especially among pressurized water reactors (PWRs) supplied by  
Westinghouse (W).  
Past analyses by the author have determined that only a small fraction of  
the performance gap between large and small reactors has been statistically  
attributable to age differences. 6 The power industry has countered that the data  
bases were too small to give meaning to this finding, and it has insisted that  
large reactors would eventually mature to the performance levels of smaller  
reactors. But even though reactor operating experience has now reached the  
level deemed sufficient by the industry to support statistical inference, 7 the gap  
between large and small reactor capacity factors has remained constant at 12  
percentage points.  
Although the author's most recent regression analysis covered data only  
through 1977, there have been no applicable changes in reactor performance  
since then. At that time, large reactors had a cumulative performance average  
of only 53%, but they had averaged a mere three years of operation; most were  
just entering their "maturity," as the age data in Figure 11.2 show, and were  
expected by the industry to register large capacity factor gains. Instead, during  
1978 through mid-1980, the large reactors averaged only 55% capacity factor,  
raising their cumulative record by only one percentage point. Smaller reactors  
gained by the same minuscule amount, from 65% to 66%. Although average  
reactor age increased from approximately four to six years from 1 977 to  
mid-1980, the industry-wide capacity factor average has remained at exactly  
60%.c Anticipated performance maturation has not materialized.  
These data indicate that no significant improvement in the performance  
of large reactors should be anticipated. The burden of proof thus lies with the  
industry to justify capacity factor projections well over60% in view of the 54%  
c. The average reactor capacity factor remained at 60% despite one percentage point  
improvements in both large and small reactor averages, because the proportion of large reactors  
in the mix increased.  
248 Chapter 11 Table 11.1  
U.S. Nuclear Capacity Factors Through June 1980  
Plants Under Plants Over  
800 Megawatts 800 Megawatts All Plants  
Pressurized Water Reactors 69% 53% 61%  
13/104 27/120 40/224  
Westinghouse 70% 52% 63%  
II /91 13/57 24/148  
Babcock & Wilcox (none) 54% 54%  
9/39 9/39  
Combustion Engineering 65% 56% 59%  
2/13 5/24 7/37  
Boiling Water Reactors 62% 56% 59%  
(General Electric) 10/70 12/68 22/138  
All Reactors 66% 54% 60%  
23/174 39//88 62/362  
Figures in italics are, respectively, number of plants and cumulative number of plant-years.  
Table excludes plants under 400 Megawatts.  
large-reactor average to date.  
The Meaning of the 1979-80 Performance Decline: Figure II. I shows  
that industry-wide capacity factors tumbled from 65% in 1977-78 to around  
60% in 1979 and 50% for the first half of 1980. (Preliminary second-half 1980  
data show a rebound to about 60%.) Figure 11.2 shows the same trends for  
large reactors at a level about five percentage points less.  
Because the downturn coincided with the March 1979 accident at Three  
Mile Island, some have inferred that it is transitory and that a return to the  
higher capacity factors of 1977-78 is in the offing. A more sober interpretation,  
however, may be that the decline reflects two negative performance trends: an  
upsurge in occurrence and detection of mechanical and design failures, and the  
advent of a more stringent NRC regulatory stance.  
The increase in mechanical and design defects was noted in Section 5.4  
(Figs. 5.1 and 5 .2). It has been especially apparent for Westinghouse reactors.  
Many of the 24 W plants have experienced prolonged shutdowns since early  
1979 because of problems unrelated to TMI. Approximately a dozen plants  
required repairs of cracked ·welds connecting feed water piping (carrying  
Chapter II 249 65  
60  
55  
50  
y ear  
Figure 11.1  
Average Nuclear Capacity Factor By Year, Percent  
(reactors 400 megawatts or greater)  
65 66  
,§:1 64  
~ 60 59  
57 57  
_.§L  
~ 72 73 74 75 75 n 78 79  
71  
70  
Bar width denotes number of commercially operating plants.  
51  
so  
'  
heated reactor water) to steam generators. Many have also undergone inspec­tions and repairs of cracked low-pressure turbine disc assemblies. Two W  
plants were closed for eight months to repair cracks in concrete bolts used to  
anchor pipe supports, and another for a year to repair reactor coolant pumps  
and piping and to make seismic modifications. Another plant was closed for  
over a year to replace its corroded and cracked steam-generator tubes, a  
process now in progress at that reactor's twin and scheduled for at least two  
other plants before mid-1982.  
These problems caused the average W capacity factor for 1979 and the  
first half of 1980 to fall to 56%, from 65% previously. The 13 large W plants  
(over 800 MW) ran at only 46%, reducing their cumulative average from 55%  
to 52%. In contrast, the eight 500-MW-class W reactors have averaged 72%  
both to date and in the same 18-month period, indicating that Westinghouse  
250 Chapter II Figure 11.2  
Average Large Reactor Capacity Factor By Year, Percent  
% (reactors 800 megawatts or greater)  
6 2  
60  
60 ~  
53  
50 50  
44 ~  
40  
Year . 71 72 r3 74 75 76 n 78  
Reactor Age  
Average 1.3 ~.7 2.0 2.1 2.5 3.2 3.6  
Standard o.s o.a 1.1 1.3 15 1.6 1.9  
Deviation  
Bar width denotes number of commercially operating plants.  
52  
79  
48  
eo  
i!irs1 half)  
2.1 2.1  
design and mechanical deficiencies have been most pronounced at the large  
plants.  
Similarly, many of the 22 General Electric (GE) boiling water reactors  
(BWRs) have been shut recently to repair cracks in primary system piping and  
emergency core cooling system (ECCS) sprays (a problem dating back many  
years) and to modify "suppression pool" containment structures to improve  
their stability during postulated accidents (addressing a longstanding safety  
problem). Outages such as these reduced the average GE reactor capacity  
factor to 53% for the first half of 1980 from the all-time 66% highs in 1978 and  
1979. The seven Combustion Engineering plants have experienced a similar  
downturn. The nine reactors manufactured by Babcock & Wilcox (B&W),  
including the two at Three Mile Island, have suffered the worst decline, from  
60% to only 41% capacity factor during January 1979 through June 1980.  
Chapter II 251 TMI-related safety checks and backfits contributed greatly to B&W plant  
shutdowns, but so did failures in instrumentation and control systems, reactor  
coolant pumps, and other equipment.  
The effect of mechanical problems on nuclear plant performance has  
apparently intensified, then, even apart from TMI, following a pronounced dip  
in 1977-78. In addition, regulatory constraints on reactor operation appear to  
be increasing. The TMI accident has legitimized regulatory-required backfits,  
a step which NRC had previously taken infrequently. Most reactors have  
sustained only brief (one- to four-week) shutdowns or outage extensions since  
TMI for minor equipment modifications, but NRC has committed itself in its  
post-TMI Action Plan to weigh major plant changes involving instrumenta­tion, containment, and heat-removal systems (Chapter 6). TMI also takes  
some credit for NRC's recent establishment of compliance schedules for  
equipment installation (with attendant outages) to address longstanding safety  
issues such as environmental qualification of electrical equipment and fire  
protection. In addition, the accident has directed NRC's attention away from  
reactor licensing toward reactor operations (Section 6.6), making it less likely  
that licensees will be able to operate plants with equipment problems or shorten  
maintenance and repair outages.  
TMI's impact has been reinforced by other reactor mishaps in 1979-80,  
as Chapter 5 shows. The discovery of errors in seismic stress calculations at  
five reactors and of deficiencies in ''as-built'' piping systems at a dozen others  
has diminished NRC's confidence in the capacity of design margins to com­pensate for analysis errors or equipment failure. Interactions at several Bab­cock & Wilcox plants between "non-safety" and "safety" instrumentation  
and control systems which initiated "transients" while cutting off critical  
status indicators have underscored reactor vulnerability to "common-mode"  
failures. The partial failure of automatic scram at Browns Ferry and subse­quent discovery of design deficiencies in BWR scram systems have also  
heightened NRC's consciousness of the potential for serious accidents. As  
Section 5.4 notes, the rapid rise in NRC's issuance of safety-problem Bulletins  
and Circulars since TMI demonstrates greater attention to reactor operations as  
well as the presence of problem areas likely to require correction.  
Outlook: The discussion above indicates that nuclear capacity factors  
are subject to pressures similar to those affecting capital costs. Increased  
operating experience provides valuable information to improve performance,  
but it also demonstrates that, as designed, reactors are prone to mishaps and  
need closer surveillance and continual backfits. Growth in the population of  
plants, moreover, gives greater visibility to reactor problems and adds to  
pressure for remedial fixes. Thus, nuclear capacity factors may be destined to  
fall-or at least stagnate-rather than rise as the nuclear sector expands, in  
much the same way that the capital cost reduction gained through learning in  
building more reactors has been more than offset by the costs of new safety  
252 Chapter II measures needed to keep the chances of a serious accident from growing as fast  
as the sector itself.  
It is too early to tell whether these negative forces will prove stronger  
than countervailing efforts to improve performance. The latter include in­corporating greater design margins in new plants, stocking more spare parts,  
employing more overtime repair, and generally refining designs to correct  
emerging problems. But in light of the 54% average capacity factor to date for  
large reactors, it will be surprising if new plants manage to exceed 60% on a  
longterm average basis. The total nuclear cost calculation in Chapter 12  
employs a 60% capacity factor,d with 55% and 65% in sensitivity analyses.  
Section 11.2: Coal Capacity Factors  
Fixed costs-capital charges and non-variable operating and mainte­nance costs--account for only 40-45% of typical coal generating costs, com­pared to about 80% for nuclear plants. Plant reliability is correspondingly less  
important to coal power economics. For each successive ten percentage point  
drop in capacity factor below 80%, coal generating costs rise by 5%%, 7%; and  
9%. This is little more than half the sensitivity of nuclear costs. The discussion  
of coal performance is therefore less detailed than that of nuclear plants.  
Coal plant performance, like reactor performance, has been proven  
sensitive to plant size (see Reference !). Two sizes are discussed here: 300  
MW, which utilities are increasingly selecting as an optimum mix of construc­tion economies and operational reliability; and 600 MW, which is still the  
average choice of most large utilities." Average capacity factors of 70-75%  
appear achievable for new 300-MW units, based on past experience, but a 70%  
projection is used in calculating costs in Chapter 12. For 600-MW plants,  
60-70% average capacity factors should be anticipated.  
These figures assume no "load-following." In practice, output cutbacks  
due to insufficient system demand have diminished the capacity factors of large  
(600-MW or larger) coal units by approximately five percentage points, 9 and  
by slightly more for 300-MW units. However, new coal units on oil- or  
d. A repon in preparation by Sandia Laboratories for NRC gives strong implicit suppon  
to this projection.• It projects capacity factors for years two through ten of only 61% for large  
PWRs and 65% for all BWRs, even though it considered neither first-year data nor 1980  
operation. These excluded categories together account for almost half as much data, at six to  
seven percentage point lower capacity factors, as the data used to generate the repon's predictive  
regression equations. ~  
e, A suggestive but inconclusive regression on this study's coal plant data base indicates  
that typical unit size declined from approximately 700 MW for 1971 installation to 440 MW in  
1978 (Section 10. 1). Less dramatically. the average size of new fossil boiler orders reponed  
annually in Electrical World fell from approximately 500 MW in 1976-78 to 450 MW in 1979,  
Funher declines should be expected as utilities adapt capacity planning to reduced load growth.  
Chapter II 253 gas-based systems will have a considerable fuel cost advantage and should  
undergo virtually no load-following. Load-following by new coal units on  
coal-based systems will probably be minimized by interconnections to oil or  
gas systems and load-management efforts, both of which are far more econom­ical than in the past, and through "environmental dispatching" of new low­pollution plants in preference to older, poorly controlled sources.  
The primary data sources for performance of 300-MW coal units are the  
author's 1976 Power Plant Performance (see Reference I) and Edison Electric  
Institute's annual ''Reports on Equipment Availability.'' Although these doc­uments employ disparate data bases and capacity measures, they both indicate  
a 70% performance capability, or capacity performance (capacity factor cor­rected for load-following), for 300-MW coal units, and approximately 62% for  
600-MW units, over the past decade (see box).  
Coal Plant Performance Changes: The average capacity performance  
of coal-fired plants fell markedly in the late 1960s and early 1970s, as Fig. 11.3  
shows, primarily because of the following four factors:  
• introduction of larger, less reliable units {see size trend in Fig.  
11.3);  
• pollution control backfitting (primarily precipitator upgrading)  
beginning around 1970;  
• reduced design margins (e.g., smaller furnaces) to hold down  
capital costs;  
• mismatches between boiler characteristics and coal grade be­cause of air quality-related fuel switching and coal quality de­clines attributable to changed mining practices and supplier­utility relationships.  
An Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) analysis of the 1976-77  
performance of large, primarily coal-fired plants suggests that the latter two  
factors are still taking a heavy toll. Forty percent of identifiable capacity factor  
losses resulted from boiler-related problems, such as slagging and fouling of  
boiler tubes, that are directly attributable to insufficient design margins and  
fuel quality problemsf Similar figures probably apply for other coal plant  
sizes as well.  
Much of this chronic capacity factor loss appears retrievable through  
design improvements. EPRI notes that "[t]he majority of fossil boilers now  
f. Reference 9, Table 5-l, shows 34.6% average capacity factor loss excluding "omit­ted" losses ( 1.5%). 13.8% (40%) is the sum of: 5.8% for boiler tubes, 1.1% for slag, ash and  
fouling, I. 9% for fuel handling equipment, and 1.5% for continuous deratings, all from Table  
5-3; and an estimated one-third share of overhaul outages ( !0.8%, Table 5-1). Other boiler  
problems, involving fans, burners. air preheaters, or miscellany, total43% (Table 5-3) but are  
not included here since they are not direCtly caused by reduced design margins or coal quality.  
254 Chapter II 300-MW Coal Unit Capacity Performance  
Data compiled by the author (Reference I, Chapter 6) estab­lish that 200-400 MW coal units averaged slightly over 73% capac­ity performance from 1961 through 1973. Edison Electric Institute  
data indicate an average "equivalent availability" (availability  
factor corrected for partial outages-essentially the same as capac­ity performance) of 76% for 200-400 MW fossil units during  
1968-77. (Both figures were derived by separately averaging the  
200-300 and 300-400 MW size groups so as to avoid giving greater  
weight to the more numerous, higher-performing 200-300 MW  
units.)  
These data require several downward adjustments. Two per­centage points should be deducted from the EEl figure to eliminate  
higher-performing oil and gas units, and another four to convert  
EEI' s plant capability ratings to the 5-6% higher "nameplate"  
capacity ratings used in the present study. The author's figure  
should be reduced by several percentage points to compensate for  
early coal plant data which preceded the recent performance  
decline.  
These adjustments establish an approximate 70% perfor­mance average for 200-400 MW coal units over the past decade.  
Similar calculations on both the author's and EEI data establish a  
62% performance capability for 400-800 MW coal units which is  
confirmed by an EPRI analysis of recent data (see Reference 8, p.  
5-6).  
being designed and constructed are designed for poorer fuel qualities and  
generally have increased design margins and so would be expected to perform  
better than large units now operating." 10 Boiler improvements such as spare  
coal crushers, more soot blowers, thicker boiler tubes, larger furnaces, and  
temperature controls already accounted for an increase of approximately $10/  
kilowatt (kW) (1979 steam-plant dollars) in average coal plant capital costs  
from 1971 to 1978 (see Section 7 .I).  
Elimination of half of all boiler outages related to design margins and  
coal quality would restore as much as seven percentage points of lost capacity  
factor for typical 600-MW units and six points for 300-MW units. Other major  
EPRI and Department of Energy (DOE) research geared to performance im­provements-the first such major effort ever applied to coal plants-may bring  
additional gains. Programs currently underway pertain to coal composition  
monitoring, turbine blade failure, reliability of auxiliary machinery such as  
feed pumps and fans, and analysis of coal combustion parameters and process­Chapter II 255 90%  
80%  
70%  
60%  
Figure 11.3  
Coal Plant Capacity Performance, 1961-73  
400MW 400 MW  
300 MW  
Average Unit Size  
226MW 200MW  
L..----~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~»0------~0MW l961 1952 1963 1964 19:65 1966 1967 1~ 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973  
Source: Reference I, p. 106.  
es such as temperature, mixing, and kinetics.  
Balanced against these putative gains, of course, are possible further  
operational constraints from stricter pollution control requirements. This  
study envisions that future (1988 and after) coal plants will have 99.9%  
particulate controls (probably through baghouses), 95%-efficient regenerable·  
sulfur dioxide (SOz) scrubbers, and nitrogen oxide (NOx) controls requiring  
advanced burners or flue-gas devices or both. This equipment is massive and  
complex and can affect other plant equipment. Although modular construction  
of baghouses and scrubbers will reduce plant downtime due to equipment  
failure, monitoring of control efficacy will almost certainly increase as use of  
coal expands, raising the potential for regulatory shutdowns.  
Nevertheless, the negative factors on coal performance reliability appear  
likely to be outweighed by the positive forces, and, for that matter, by the new  
constraints on nuclear plant performance. Future coal plants designed for the  
very stringent emission levels assumed here should require few backfi ts,  
unlike inadequately controlled older coal plants or reactors whose safety has  
been called into question by the Three Mile Island accident. Moreover, most  
problems with coal pollution control systems are confined to those systems,  
and thus easier to fix, whereas reactor safety problems frequently "ripple  
through" much of the plant, as discussed in the first part ofChapter4.  
On balance, it seems reasonable to anticipate improvements of several  
256 Chapter II percentage points over past levels for future coal plants. (Nuclear costs are  
calculated on the basis of a 60% capacity factor, despite the 54% large-reactor  
average to date.) This would put capacity factors (absent load-following) of  
600-MW coal plants in the middle of the 60-70% range, and of300-MW plants  
within the 70-75% range. Nevertheless, a 70% capacity factor, equalling past  
performance capability, is assumed in calculating coal generating costs for  
300-MW plants in Chapter 12.  
Section 11.3: Coal Fuel Costs  
The cost of mining coal and delivering it to generating stations will  
account for half of the average life-cycle cost of future coal-generated electric­ity, as Table 12.1 shows (based on this study's cost assumptions, including  
"real" average annual coal price escalation of 2.3%). This far exceeds the  
35% share of total power costs accounted for by capital costs, even assuming  
the advanced pollution controls just described. Accordingly, projected coal  
generating costs are extremely sensitive to the assumed coal cost. Indeed,  
varying the future annual rate of real escalation in coal prices between zero and  
4% produces an extremely wide range, from I .5 to 1 .0, in the ratio of projected  
lifetime costs of new nuclear to coal plants (neither ratio assumes any signifi­cant cost impact from the' Three Mile Island accident, as discussed in Chapter  
12).  
An in-depth analysis of future coal cost trends is beyond this study's  
scope, however. They are subject to a multitude of factors, some of which are  
sketched below, that cannot be predicted confidently and whose effects on  
costs are hard to gauge in any event. In fact, published, "expert" cost  
projections show considerable divergence, compounded by geographical vari­ations in mining and transportation costs.  
Instead, the 1979 U.S. average cost of coal burned by utilities, $!.20/  
106 Btu, is used here as a cost basis, and it is assumed to increase at an average  
of 2.3% per year in real terms (relative to inflation in other industrial com­modities)-the average increase rate from 1974 to 1979. 11 This period is  
employed for extrapolation because it contains all empirical cost data subse­quent to the steep run-up in prices that followed the 1973-74 oil price rise.  
Moreover, an examination of underlying conditions affecting coal prices  
suggests that price escalation should be no more severe in the future than  
during 1974-79.  
Mining Productivity: The marked drop in mining' 'productivity'' (ton­nage per worker-shift) shown in Figure 11.4 is statistically responsible for  
much of the real increase in coal prices during the 1970s. Labor costs make up  
half of the cost of mining deep (underground) mined coal and a smaller but  
growing percentage of the cost of strip mined coal, which now accounts for  
Chapter II 257 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 19n 1978 1979  
Source: Reference 12.  
two-thirds of utility coal.  
The causes of the productivity decline have been described as follows in  
studies for DOE and the Department of Labor (DOL), and EPRI: 13 · 14  
258  
• Health and safety and environmental regulations: The Coal  
Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969 has reduced deep mine  
productivity by requiring added workers who do not directly  
extract and transport coal, i.e., personnel to inspect coal faces,  
perform additional roofbolting and rockdusting, check for  
methane, etc., and also by slowing production to conduct inspec­tions and conform with maintenance and equipment-reliability  
standards. State land reclamation laws and the federal Surface  
Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 have reduced strip  
mine productivity by requiring operational adjustments and addi­tional workers to reseed land and restore contours, particularly in  
smaller Appalachian and midwestern strip mines.  
• Labor strife and variability: Both contract and wildcat strikes  
as well as absenteeism were endemic in coal-mining in the 1970s  
and diminished output rates. They also contributed to boom-bust  
fluctuations which indirectly reduced productivity by fostering  
Chapter II marginal mining practices (e.g., overtime) and creating a mar­ket for coal from marginal, high-cost mines. Poor labor-man­agement relations also eroded work incentives.  
• High coal prices: According to the DOE-DOL analysis, these  
"may not have caused inefficiency [but] have allowed it to  
exist," 15 both by making marginal mines profitable and by  
supporting inefficient management and work practices.  
Neither study found resource depletion to be a significant cause of  
reduced productivity-not surprisingly in view of the enormous resource base  
remaining in all producing areas. Both studies conclude that the productivity  
decline has bottomed out-a judgment strongly supported by preliminary 1980  
data 16-and anticipate future gains. The EPRI study projects average 1990  
production rates of 10.8 net tons per miner per day for deep mines and 37.4  
tons for strip mines, 17 37% and 51% above respective 1979 levels. 18 The  
DOE-DOL analysis offers no projections but does conclude that the productiv­ity decline in the 1970s was "transitional ... not chronic" and that both deep  
and strip mines will show modestly higher productivity. 19  
These expectations are based on gradual workforce maturation, in­creases in mine size (particularly for strip mines), shifts to producing areas  
with more favorable geology (primarily the West), a judgment that new health  
and safety rules will not further depress productivity, and anticipated tech­nological improvement. 2° Corroborating the last two assumptions, new mines  
are being built with ventilation systems and ground supports designed to  
permit roofbolting and mine dust control without the productivity losses  
absorbed by existing mines. 21 In addition, some well-financed new mines are  
deploying advanced technologies such as coal-bed degasification and longwall  
mining that may boost profits and productivity while meeting safety rules. 22  
Finally, labor-management relations in the coal fields have apparently  
rebounded significantly from their deteriorated status in the 1970s. New onsite  
grievance mechanisms and profit-sharing incentives established in the 1978  
contract have reduced the number of miner-days lost to wildcat strikes by 90%  
from their 1977 high, and 84% from the 1974-76 average, based on 1978  
data. 23 Absenteeism is down as welL 24 In addition, the mining industry has  
begun developing formal, systematic programs to replace the haphazard on­the-job training traditionally used to break in new miners. This "new training  
infrastructure" 25 should improve both miners' incentives and their ability to  
safely extract coaL  
Demand for Coal: The rate of increase in the tonnage of coal mined  
will also affect coal prices. U.S. coal mining increased at an average 5.4%  
annual rate during 1974-80, from 610 to 836 million tons, although the  
increase rate would have been considerably higher had the I 00 million tons/  
Chapter II 259 year or mo;e of unused mining capacity been employed in 1980. A too-rapid  
expansion in future mining could accelerate price increases by creating bottle­necks in the supply of mining equipment. At least as importantly, rapid  
expansion could create tight market conditions conducive to producer profit­taking.  
Future coal demand will be determined by numerous variables, including  
oil and gas availability and price, government support for coal-derived syn­thetic fuels, nuclear power growth, the coal export market, resolution of  
environmental concerns, and, especially, total demand for electricity and  
energy. Although the rising price of oil and gas will increasingly open their  
markets to coal, it will also depress total energy demand below previous  
projections-a phenomenon consistently underestimated by most past fore­casters (in assessing nuclear power growth, for example). Thus, as Table 1!.2  
shows, U.S. coal mining would increase at an average annual rate of only 6. I%  
during 1979-90, less than I% per year above the 1974-80 rate, even if half the  
nuclear capacity under construction and all reactors on order are cancelled, and  
coal exports triple, and coal substitutes for one-quarter of present industrial  
consumption and one-half of present utility consumption of oil and gas, and  
coal provides half the feedstock for a one million barrel-per-day synthetic fuels  
industry-p;ovided that industrial non-electric energy use remains constant  
and electricity generation grows at 2% annually. Most of these assumptions  
appear quite liberal,s and thus actual growth in coal demand could easily fall  
short of the past 5.4% annual rate that in turn lagged behind increases in  
capacity and permitted output to grow without precipitous price rises.  
Coal Transportation: Shipping coal from mines to generating stations  
adds only one-fourth to the cost of typical Appalachian coal, but it exceeds  
mining costs for much western coal used in the South Central and Middle West  
regions (and, in future, on the Pacific Coast). Haulage charges for rail trans­port, by far the dominant mode, increased faster than general inflation in the  
1970s, although this was partly attributable to the railroads' failure to antici­pate the increase in demand-a condition not likely to recur-which resulted in  
the use of antiquated rolling stock and track.  
Although federal deregulation of freight rates will lead to further price  
rises, average coal transportation costs will probably not increase rapidly in  
real (inflation-adjusted) terms in the future. Most of the future increases in coal  
traffic will be carried by the financially healthier railroads, and they have  
already begun planning for rapid growth in coal traffic, according to a recent  
report by the Transportation and Energy Departments. 28 Efficiencies will be  
gained by converting many eastern routes to dedicated "unit trains." Possible  
competition from coal slurry pipelines-indeed, even the mere threat of their  
g. Electricity sales grew at just under 3%/year during 1973-80 and are widely projected  
(e.g., by Exxon 26 ) to increase by less than 2%/year after 1980. Industrial non-electric energy  
consumption fell by 3.6% from 1973 to 1979.'7  
260 Chapter II Utilities (p. 23)  
Industrial  
Coal (p. 21)  
Table 11.2  
Disposition Of U.S. Coal Mining  
(quads/year)  
1979  
11.26  
3.56  
Share of Oil and Gas (p. 21) 0  
1990  
17.12  
3.56  
4.02  
('t. share)  
Residential/Commercial (p. 20) 0.23 0.23  
Exports (p. 54) 1.58 4.74  
Synthetic Fuels 0 1.64  
Addition to Stocks (p. 54) 0.76 0.30  
TOTAL 17.39 31.61  
Page numbers refer to data in DOE, Monthly Energy Review, August 1980.  
1990 utility use was calculated as follows: 1979 net generation of2.247 ,372 MWh  
(p. 60) is increased by 2%/year to 1990, yielding 2,794.325. Nuclear share is  
551,880, based on 105 GW (54 GW in 1980 + half of !02 GW under con­struction-see Chapter I) @ 60% capacity factor. Hydro remains constant at  
279,783 (p. 60). Oil and gas is halved from 1979's 633,010 (p. 60). Remaining  
1,646,157 MWh is provided by coal@ 10,400 Btu/kWh.  
Exports were calculated assuming 12,000 Btu/lb. Synthetic fuels projection  
assumes two-thirds conversion efficiency and six million Btu/barrel. 1979 stocks  
addition assumes II ,200 Btu/lb. 1990 projection assumes addition of 60-day  
supply for 6% growth increment. 1979 total agrees with production of 17.41 quads  
(p. 4).  
Annual mining growth measured in quads/year averages 5.6%. Assumed reduction  
in Btu/lb from 11,200 in 1979 to 10,600 in 1990 adds 0.5%/year to tonnage  
requirement, for 6. I %/year total growth.  
introduction-will probably moderate increases in western long-haul rates.  
Higher costs for diesel fuel should not require significant rate hikes since fuel  
accounts for a small share of total rail costs and will increasingly be conserved  
through use of more efficient locomotives.  
Outlook: The preceding discussion suggests the difficulty of forecast­Chapter II 261 ing future coal prices and indicates that both inflationary and restraining forces  
are at work. Extrapolation of the 1979 average utility coal cost at the 1974-79  
real increase rate appears to provide a reasonable middle ground. This ap­proach is conservative (leading to high forecasts) in two modest respects.  
First, the 1979 base price, Sl.20/106 Btu, reflects some utilities' use of  
premium low-sulfur coal to meet air-quality standards without scrubbers,  
whereas new air quality rules requiring scrubbers at all new plants will allow  
use of cheaper higher-sulfur coal. Second, preliminary 1980 data29 show an  
inflation-adjusted decline of 1- Ph% in that year's coal prices, reducing the  
post-1974 annual rate of real increase from 2.3% through 1979 to !.7%  
through 1980.  
These assumptions, combined with an assumed 10,000 Btu/kWh heat  
rate, lead to a projected "Jevelized" average coal fuel cost (see Section 12.1)  
of 1.96¢/kWh, in 1979 constant dollars, during 1988-2017, the years in which  
a coal plant commenced today is assumed to operate. This is 63% greater, in  
real terms, than the actual 1979 average cost of utility coaL Use of a I. 7%  
annual real increase rate instead of 2.3% would result in a fuel cost of  
I. 72¢/kWh, vs. 1. 96¢/kWh forecast here.  
Table I 1.3 indicates that the power industry's projections of coal fuel  
costs fall in a narrow range and are less than this study's forecast. DOE's  
estimate exceeds this study's, but it assumes no mine-mouth plants except  
lignite-fired, and thus overstates transportation costs, and also employs  
"marginal prices" while admitting that "[aJctual prices could increase at a  
slower rate if long-term contract arrangements keep some prices at below the  
marginal cost. " 3° Finally, although most of the estimates in Table 11.3  
predate the 1979 oil price rise and the concomitant move to substitute coal for  
oil, it is not clear that these factors will significantly swell coal demand, as  
discussed above.  
Section 11.4: Nuclear Fuel Costs  
Nuclear fuel costs, from uranium mining and milling through enrich­ment, fuel manufacture, and eventual disposal of spent fuel, account for 23%  
of projected nuclear generating costs. The breakdown of this share in Table  
11.4 shows that nuclear power costs are only slightly sensitive to mining and  
enrichment costs and will barely be affected by disposal costs, unless disposal  
costs are significantly greater than projected here. Accordingly, nuclear fuel  
costs are treated only briefly.  
Uranium Mining and Milling: The price of uranium on the spot (non­contract) market jumped from $8 to $40 per pound in 1975-76, the result of a  
host of factors, including price manipulation by a worldwide uranium cartel,  
DOE stockpiling of enriched uranium, and fears of future shortages. The spot  
262 Chapter II Table 11.3  
Coal Fuel Cost Projections  
Ratio To This  
Source Estimate Study's Estimate  
EPRI 31 Year2000: 1.80¢/kWh 0.93  
Sargent & Lundyn !988-20 17 levelized: 1.63¢/kWh 0.83  
Bechtel33 1988-20171evelized: 1.63¢/kWh 0.83  
DOE34 Year 1995: 2.21¢/kWh 1.28  
Gibbs & HilllS 1988-20171evelized: 1.56¢/kWh 0.80  
The sources used here comprise the projections available to the author and are not  
intended to be representative, although they appear to be. All projections except  
the last were expressed in 1978 dollars and were multiplied by l. 125 (1978· 79  
industrial commodities inflation) to convert to author's 1979 base. Reference dates  
or periods shown for first four projections are those employed by source and are  
compared against this study's estimate for same date or period. Gibbs & Hill figure  
in 1979 dollars was escalated to 1988 and levelized over 1988-2017 by author at  
!%/year, although source's p. 4 suggests zero real escalation was assumed.  
Table 11.4  
Shares Of Nuclear Fuel Costs  
Share Of Share Of Total  
Fuel Process Fuel Cost Nuclear Cost  
Uranium Mining & Milling 50% II%  
Enrichment 28% 6%  
Manufacture 8% 2%  
Storage & Shipping 2% •  
Disposal J3% 3%  
*Denotes less than .5%. Total does not add to sum due to independent rounding.  
price has since settled back to $35 as new mines have opened, anticipated  
nuclear capacity has fallen precipitously, and DOE has increased the efficiency  
Chapter ll 263 of uranium utilization in its enrichment facilities.  
Uranium prices are assumed here to rise at 2% per year (in real terms)  
from a $35/lb base 1979 price. Costs will increase due to: (l) more stringent  
regulations to reduce accidents and radiological exposure in mining; (2) en­vironmental regulations to reduce land, air, and water pollution and radiologi­cal contamination from uranium mining, milling, and mill tailings; and (3}  
resource depletion, which has already caused the average grade ofU .S.-mined  
ore to decline by half from 1966-67 to 1979, from .22% to .11%. 36 The last  
factor reinforces the others by increasing the volume of ore processed and  
accompanying environmental disruption. Conversely, the rate of cost increase  
will be moderated by prospective spare production capacity as anticipated  
nuclear capacity declines further and by potential technological advances such  
as in-situ uranium leaching from phosphate rock.  
Enrichment: Uranium will be enriched for future reactors at the three  
existing U.S. gaseous diffusion facilities and at a centrifuge plant under  
construction. The gaseous diffusion plants are used here as a cost basis  
although the centrifuge plant will be more expensive due to construction  
inflation.  
The price of enrichment under utilities' fixed-commitment {long-term}  
contracts with AEC/DOE rose from $32 per separative work unit (SWU) in  
1972 to $89 in 1979-a real increase rate of 4.8% per year relative to industrial  
commodity prices. The primary cause was the rising cost of electricity, which  
accounts for approximately 60% of enrichment charges. This cost will con­tinue to rise, although not necessarily at the past increase rate, because of the  
large construction program and extensive pollution control retrofits being  
undertaken by TV A, the major supplier of power to the gaseous diffusion  
facilities. Real escalation at 1.5%/year is assumed here from a base of $94/  
SWU-the average enrichment cost in 1979.  
Fuel Manufacture: This "step" involves conversion of uranium metal  
to a gas suitable for enriching, and fabrication of enriched uranium into oxide  
fuel pellets that are stacked into fuel assemblies. Both processes are techni­cally mature. DOE cost estimates are employed here37 with zero real cost  
escalation.  
Spent Fuel Storage and Shipping: Irradiated fuel assemblies are as­sumed to be stored for ten years, at an annual cost of $6 per kilogram (kg) of  
uranium, and shipped to either an away-from-reactor storage site (AFR) or a  
final repository for $16/kg. Both costs are from DOE, 38 in 1978 dollars.  
Although costs could increase if siting restrictions raise transport distances and  
if storage and shipping regulations are made more stringent, multiple escala­tions would be required to materially affect nuclear costs since these steps  
account for only 2% of nuclear fuel costs and less than 'h% of nuclear  
264 Chapter II generating costs, as estimated here,  
Spent Fuel Disposal: The cost to permanently bury irradiated fuel  
assemblies is drawn from a 1978 report by MHB Technical Associates for the  
Natural Resources Defens,e Council. 39 It assumes interim storage of25% of the  
fuel at an AFR and includes government regulatory and research and develop­ment (R&D) costs and contingencies such as retrieval and relocation of some of  
the first buried fuel. Moreover, the "high" cost case is used here because of  
continuing technical and institutional uncertainties surrounding waste man­agement," although the low nuclear capacity case ( 105 gigawatts [GW] in  
2000), with 23% higher unit costs than the reference case (200 GW), was not  
adopted. The cost derived here is 120% above DOE's on a per-kg basis, 42 but it  
nevertheless accounts for only 13% of nuclear fuel cost and 3% of total cost, in  
part because of accounting conventions that halve effective "back-end" costs,  
as discussed directly below.  
Inventory Costs: These represent the cost of utility capital which pays  
for fuel cycle services and is thus "tied up" as working inventory prior to the  
utility's recovery of costs through selling the nuclear electricity to its custom­ers. Inventory costs are important to nuclear fuel costs because the fuel cycle  
includes substantial lead times, These range from three years for fuel rod  
fabrication to four or more years for purchase of uranium, including the  
average of two years that a fuel element spends in the reactor before fissioning.  
A real annual fixed charge rate for capital of 9%-a little over one percentage  
point lower than that for capital costs-is applied here, resulting in the  
inventory costs shown in Table 11.5 below,  
Inventory costs for uranium purchases, which are assumed to occur two  
years before fuel insertion, are 1.6 mills/kWh (one mill= .I~). Conversely,  
inventory costs are negative I ,4 mills/kWh for spent fuel disposal-half of  
direct disposal costs-because utilities will be able to earn investment income  
with the money they receive from their customers before paying the federal  
government to remove the fuel (assumed to be six years after discharging the  
fuel). Net inventory costs are . 9 mills, or 9% of direct fuel costs.  
Conversion Efficiency: A "heat rate"-the number of Btus required  
per net kWh generated-of 10,600 is assumed. Average nuclear heat rate in  
h. Although decontamination of Three Mile Island Unit 2 obviously poses different  
specific problems from spent fuel disposal, recent schedule slippage and cost increases provide  
another illustration of the power industry's under-estimation of the complexities inherent in  
dealing with irradiated nuclear materials, A year after the accident, General Public Utilities, the  
owner of TMI, estimated the cost of decontamination at $300 million with completion in early  
!983. 40 Eight months later, the company raised its estimate to$! billion and targeted completion  
for mid- 1985 or later. 41 (Neither figure includes reactor "recovery" to service,)  
Chapter II 265 Table 11.5  
Nuclear Fuel Cycle Costs  
(I) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) ( 10) (II l (12)  
Number Of 1979-88 1988-2017 Direct Years From Inventory Total .__M!!Is Per kWh Costs  
Unit Cost Units Per Escalation Escalation Cost Payment To Cost Cost  
Process In 1979$ lkgU Factor Factor $/kgU Fission Factor $/kgU Direct Inventory Total --~~.- -- 
Uranium 35 16.60 1.195 1.280 888.7 4 1.412 1254.8 3.83 !.58 5.41  
2 Conversion 2.25 14.08 - - 31.7 4 1.412 44.7 .14 .05 .19  
3 Enrichment 94 4.208 1.143 1.201 543.0 3 1.295 703.2 2.34 .69 3.03  
4 Fabrication 112.5 I - - 112.5 3 1.295 145.7 .49 .14 .63  
5 Storage 11.25 6(yrs) - - 67.5 -5 .650 43.9 .29 -.10 .19  
6 Shipment 18 I - 18.0 -8 .502 9.0 .08 -.04 .04  
7 Disposal 652 I - 652.0 -8 .502 327.3 2.81 -1.40 .J.:.±!  
TOTAL 2528.8 9.98 0.92 10.90  
Column 3 assumes 0.25% enrichmenttails assay. Column 4 brings 1979 costs to 1988 for uranium (2%/y) and enrichment(! .5%/y). Column 5 is levelized average  
cost factor with 3.8% real discount rate. Column 6 is product of previous four columns. Column 7 is referenced to middle of 4-year core residence. Column 8 is  
based on 9% fixed charge rate. Column 9 is product of Columns 6 and 8. Columns 10 and 12 divide Columns 6 and 9, respectively, by conversion ratio of231,826  
kWh/kgU based on heat rate and burnup in text.  
Unit Costs for Rows I and 3 are from text. Costs for Rows 2. 4, 5 and 6 are from EIA (Ref. 30) x I. 125 ( 1978-79 industrial price inflation). Cost for Row 7 is from  
MHB (Ref. 39), $511/kgU (pp, 5-4 and 5-9), times 1.134 for 200 GW case (p. 8-3). times I. 125 to bring to 1979. 1978, the last year for which data are available, was 10,965, or 3% worse than  
projected here. 43 The range was 10,355-12,368 Btu/kWh, indicating that  
deviations from the mean are greater in the direction of inefficiency.  
The other determinant of nuclear electric conversion efficiency is ''burn­up"-the amount of heat produced by each unit of fuel in the reactor. PWRs  
employ a more highly enriched (and thus expensive) fuel than BWRs and so are  
designed to reach a higher burnup---32,600 thermal "megawatt-days"  
(MWD[t], equal to 24 MWh[t]) per metric ton of enriched uranium (MTU),  
versus 27.000 MWD(t)/MTU for BWRs. Actual bumup has averaged consider­ably less than design levels for both reactor types, 44 because some fuel  
assemblies have been discharged prematurely due to fuel failure and erratic  
capacity performance at variance with refueling schedules. The former prob­lem has largely been solved but the latter remains. Accordingly, a bumup of  
30,000 MWD(t)/MTU for a reference PWR is assumed here-8% below  
industry expectations.  
Overall Fuel Cycle Costs: Table 11.5 shows the projected costs of each  
fuel cycle step and the overall totaL  
Section 11.5: Operating And Maintenance Costs  
Operating and maintenance costs subsume all expenses incurred in run­ning a power plant, other than fuel costs. They include operating labor,  
maintenance labor, maintenance materials, operating supplies, chemicals,  
lubricants, and water.  
O&M costs have risen rapidly in recent years, in part because of increas­ingly stringent environmental and safety requirements. The 1976-79 average  
annual real escalation rates were I I% for nuclear and 7% for coal, relative to  
inflation in industrial commodities and adjusted for capacity factor (in the case  
of nuclear). Coal O&M costs are likely to increase faster than nuclear costs  
because of the high maintenance, material, and waste-disposal costs of S02  
scrubbers.  
Accordingly, although nuclear O&M costs averaged over 80% more than  
those of coal in 1979-4.11 vs. 2.26 mills/kWh-both plant types are assumed  
to average five mills/kWh in 1979 dollars, with !%/year real escalation  
thereafter. Levelized O&M costs forthe 1988-2017 plant lifetimes would then  
be 6.2 mills/kWh, accounting for 13% of total nuclear generating costs and  
16% of total coal costs.  
Nuclear Operating And Maintenance: Average nuclear O&M costs in  
recent years are shown in Table 11. 6. Because nuclear O&M costs do not vary  
significantly with the amount of electricity generated, the per-kWh cost tends  
to be inversely related to plant capacity factor. The next-to-last column of  
Chapter J J 267 Table 11.6  
Nuclear Operating And Maintenance Costs  
O&M Average Capacity O&M Adjusted Real Increase  
Year Mills/kWh Factor (CF),% To60%CF In Adjusted O&M  
1976 2.39 57 2.27  
1977 2.46 64 2.62 8%  
1978 2.95 66 3.25 16%  
1979 4.11 59 4.04 10%  
1977-79 O&M costs are from Reference 45. 1976 is author's calculation from  
Reference 46. Capacity factors are from Figure II. I. Deflator for last column is  
industrial commodities price index.  
Table 11.6 adjusts for this by calculating hypothetical O&M costs assuming  
60% capacity factor. The last column shows that adjusted O&M costs have  
increased steadily in real terms in each of the three past years.  
This trend appears to be the result of increased efforts to improve plant  
performance and to comply with NRC regulatory requirements. The former  
have involved expanded maintenance and increases in repairs performed dur­ing overtime and/or by specialized contract personnel. The latter have required  
additional staffing for operations, maintenance, inspections, and security.  
A cost base of five mills/kWh (1979 dollars) is assumed here for new  
reactors in anticipatiqn of further efforts along these lines. This base would be  
reached with only two additional years of cost escalation at the 1976-79 real  
increase rate (10%/year) from the 1979 cost of 4.1 mills. For largerreactors­which usually have lower capacity factors and, therefore, higher per-kWh  
O&M costs-the 1979 average O&M cost is 4.55 mills/kWh, only one year of  
escalation away from the projection of five mills.1 A nominal I %/year real  
escalation rate is assumed from the five mill base, although the increase rate  
could easily be steeper, especially in view of more stringent NRC operational  
requirements and surveillance after the Three Mile Island accident.  
Coal Operating And Maintenance: Average coal O&M costs in recent  
years are shown in Table II. 7. They have increased one-third less rapidly than  
reactor O&M costs, but the increase has been sizeable, nevertheless. Much of  
i. Figures in this paragraph are unadjusted for capacity factor. Calculation for reactors  
750 MW and above (size class used by DOE) is from DOE (Reference 45, Table 2).  
268 Chapter II Table I J. 7  
Coal Operating And Maintenance Costs  
O&M  
Year Mills/kWh  
1976 1.42  
1977 I. 70  
1978 1.95  
1979 2.26  
Real  
Increase  
12%  
7%  
3%  
1976-77 O&M costs are author's calculations from Reference 46, based on all coal  
stations 450 MW or larger completed 1970 or later. 1978 is author's rough estimate  
from trends in AEP and TVA costs. 1979 is from Reference 45, Table 4. Figures  
were not adjusted for plant generation because average coal capacity factor data  
were unavailable.  
it apparently resulted from increased environmental requirements. The cost to  
dispose of recovered waste ash may have risen from roughly .I mills/kWh to .2  
mills (1979 dollars), and the frequency of sulfur dioxide scrubbers appears to  
have doubled to about 15%, accounting for another .I mill/kWh increase.  
(Scrubbers approximately double O&M costs, based on recent data.) These  
two factors together would then account for half of the real 1976-79 increase.  
The 1979 cost in Table II. 7 implies an O&M cost of approximately 1.8  
mills/kWh for a non-scrubber plant, adjusted to the 70% capacity factor  
assumed for future coal plants) Scrubbers will add an average of two to three  
mills/kWh for operating and maintenance personnel, chemical reagents, and  
waste disposal ,k with costs for particular plants varying with the process  
employed and coal sulfur content. Further measures to segregate waste ash  
j. Assuming 15% of the 1979 sample plants have scrubbers, with O&M costs double those  
of non-scrubber plants, the average O&M cost for the latter is I. 96 mills. If half of this cost is  
fixed and half variable, correction from.an estimated 60% capacity factor to 70% reduces the total  
cost to 1.82 mills.  
k. Estimate based on a report for EPRI by Bechtel'' O&M costs for eight scrubber  
processes in its Chapter 6 were adjusted to exclude steam and electricity (already incorporated in  
fue'l cost as heat-rate penalty and confirmed as inadvertent double-counting by EPRI project  
manager in 3 October I 980 telephone communication with author) and converted from 1978 to  
I 979 by multiplying by I. 125 ( 1978-79 industrial commodities inflation). 70% capacity factor is  
assumed both in report and here. Range of costs (averaging low- and high-sulfur) is 2.2 to 3.0  
mills/kWh with 2.6 mill average.  
Chapter II 269 from the environment may add another one-half mill to costs, but increasing  
use of regenerable scrubbers should limit cost sensitivity to prospective  
hazardous-waste regulations. (Only three of the eight current scrubber pro­cesses produce hard-to-dispose sludge [see Note "k"], and these had the  
highest projected O&M costs. Three others are regenerable, one yields poten­tially salable gypsum, and another produces calcium salts which can be  
handled relatively easily.)  
Combining the 1.8 mill/kWh base I 979 cost, two to three mills projected  
for the scrubber, and .5 mills for improved ash disposal, the estimated O&M  
cost for new coal plants is approximately five mills/kWh, in 1979 dollars­equal to the estimate for nuclear O&M. This too is escalated at I% per year in  
real terms, giving a levelized 30-year cost in 1979 dollars of 6.2 mills/kWh.  
No credit is included for possible productive uses of wastes, despite improving  
economics. Recovered fly ash and sulfur are increasingly being used for  
construction and road-paving, and TV A is testing a process to extract alumi­num and other metals from fly ash. 48  
Section 11.6: Financing Costs  
Utility plants must earn revenue to pay back investors-bondholders and  
stockholders-for providing capital to finance construction. The revenue re­quirements are proportional to the plant's capital cost, as are the corporate  
income taxes on net revenue, property taxes assessed by local municipalities,  
allowances for interim replacement of equipment, and insurance. These costs  
are together referred to as fixed charges, and the ratio of annual fixed charges to  
total capital cost is the fixed charge rate.  
Fixed charge rates of 10.3% and 9. 8% are assumed here for nuclear and  
coal plants, respectively, in real terms. (The 15-20% fixed charge rates in the  
literature are expressed in current dollars, unadjusted for inflation, and are not  
compatible with the inflation-adjusted methodology of this study.) The 10.3%  
and 9.8% rates are based on assumed real costs of capital of 3.8% for nuclear  
investments and 3. 6% for coal, i.e., on the expectation that the average rate of  
return on the equity (stocks) and debt (bonds) issued by utilities to finance  
nuclear/coal construction will exceed the inflation rate by 3.8/3.6 percentage  
points.  
The real cost of utility capital averaged 2.8% during 1967-71 and 3.3%  
during 1972-77. 49 Higher values are anticipated here for new plants because  
growing uncertainty in the electric utility business is increasing the "risk  
premium" necessary to attract investment capital. A greater risk premium is  
anticipated for nuclear investments because of their greater capital costs (even  
as perceived by investors, notwithstanding limited industry candor), longer  
construction durations, greater exposure to regulatory delay and escalation,  
and vulnerability to abandonment due to public opposition or reactor acci­270 Chapter II dents. These factors led to a small premium in the rates of return for some  
nuclear utilities in the late 1970s, and this has been widened by the Three Mile  
Island accident. Nuclear construction has been a major factor in recent credit­rating reductions of utilities by Standard & Poor's, 50 and there is broad  
agreement that nuclear investments require higher rates of return.1  
The assumed .2 percentage point difference between nuclear and coal  
rates of return translates into a . 25 percentage point difference in fixed charge  
rates. (See box for methodology used to compute fixed charge rate.} Another  
.25 point difference arises from the assumed allowances for interim capital  
replacement: .25% for coal and .5% for nuclear. The former figure is the  
nominal value used in power plant economic evaluations. In this case it implies  
that 1000-MW coal plants will require $2 million per year (1979 dollars)  
during plant life to replace worn-out equipment and make any necessary design  
changes. The nuclear figure implies interim replacements of approximately $7  
million per year. Half of this is likely to be required for major equipment  
modifications and replacements such as chemical cleaning (decontamination)  
of primary system piping and new steam generators .m The other half would be  
required for other interim replacements and regulatory backfits.  
Other contingencies not assumed here could further increase the differ­ence between nuclear and coal fixed charge rates. First, the cost of regulatory­related reactor backfits could exceed the $3-4 million allowed for in the .5%  
interim replacement rate. Second, nuclear plant life could be shortened by  
radioactive wear or inability to meet advancing safety standards; reducing  
plant life by five or ten years from the assumed 30 years would add .6 or 1.5  
percentage points, respectively, to the real nuclear fixed charge rate. Third, the  
nuclear risk premium reflected in the rate of return could exceed the assumed .2  
percentage points; assuming a .5 point premium instead would add another  
). Most comparisons of rates of return for "nuclear" and ••nonAAnuc!ear .. utilities fail to  
differentiate between utilities with operating reactors and those with reactors under construction.  
The latter are both the subject of this study and the more susceptible to uncertainty. Nevertheless,  
a typical such analysis found that 59 utilities with planned or installed nuclear capacity had a .25  
percentage point higher average common stock yield than 41 non-nuclear utilities one month  
before TMI, and this gap increased to .65 percentage points two months after." Moreover, the  
effect of TM! has apparently persisted. A December 1979 study by Paine Webber Mitchell  
Hutchins, Inc. concluded that stock of a non-nuclear utility would sell at almost a 5% higher  
price-to-book-value ratio than a half-nuclear utility-equivalent to about a one-half percentage  
· point difference in rate of return on equity." The same finn ranked hydroelectric power and coal  
as the ''most desirable fuel sources'' and nuclear as ''least desirable,·· even below oil. Similar  
evidence is provided in Reference 50.  
m. A DOE report" estimates that major equipment replacements during plant life will  
cost $77-117/kW for PWRs and $7.5-111/kW for BWRs (1979 dollars). or approximately $3  
million per year. This covers two chemical cleanings, retubing of condensers, PWR steam  
generator replacement, and replacement of BWR control rod drives and reactor vessel piping and  
internals.  
Chapter II 271 Calculation Of Fixed Charge Rate  
Precise calculation of fixed charge rates is extremely de­tailed. A good approximation can be obtained through the formula:  
C(i,N) t  
FCR = 1 -t x 1-NxC(i,N)+~+r,+ri  
where: i = real cost of capital (assumed .038 nuclear, .036 coal)  
N = plant life (30 years)  
t =federal/state income tax (.50, minus 10% invest­ment tax credit, or .45)  
tP = property tax rate (. 02)  
r, =capital replacement rate (.005 nuclear, .0025 coal)  
ri = insurance rate (. 0025)  
C(i,N) = i =capital recovery factor  
l - (l+ifN  
The formula yields a fixed charge rate of 10.28% for nuclear and  
9.78% for coal.  
.4% to the nuclear fixed charge rate. Any of these factors would far outweigh  
the minor (. l percentage point) reduction in nuclear fixed charge rates attribut­able to the shorter reactor life permitted for computing utility income taxes.  
Section 11.7: Reactor Decommissioning  
NRC regulations stipulate that following retirement of a reactor, it must  
be ''decommissioned'' In a manner compatible with public health and safety.  
This is assumed here to entail prompt, complete dismantlement. Mothballing  
or entombment, in which only some radioactive components are removed and  
the plant is sealed and monitored for radiation, appear to present unacceptable  
radiological hazards due to institutional uncertainties. NRC has rejected per­manent entombment because, for example, "[t]he radiation dose rates from  
the long-lived radionuclides Nickel-59 and Niobium-94 in the activated  
reactor vessel internals [would) remain well above unrestricted release levels  
[one-half rem/yr] for a period of time far exceeding the known lifetime of any  
272 Chapter ll man-made structure. " 54 Separately, NRC and former President Carter have  
advocated total dismantlement shortly after plant retirement. 55  
Because no commercial reactor has ever been dismantled, cost estimates  
must be based either on experience with small, experimental reactors or on  
conceptual studies of decommissioning conventional plants. Both approaches  
have drawbacks. The only power reactors completely dismantled to date, the  
20-MW Elk River BWR in Minnesota and the 10-MW "Sodium Reactor  
Experiment" facility nearLos Angeles, bear little resemblance to today's  
reactors. Although both may have incurred unusual costs as decommissioning  
pioneers, they accumulated less radioactivity than will today's plants (Elk  
River operated for only four years) and thus should have been easier to  
dismantle. Both plants cost approximately one-fourth as much to decommis­sion as to build, adjusted for inflation. 56 Although it would be speculative to  
apply this ratio to current plants, the figure does suggest that dismantlement  
may be costly.  
The most careful assessment of decommissioning costs appears to be a  
1978 study prepared by General Public Utilities (GPU) for its Three Mile  
Island units, prior to the accident at unit 2. 57 Unlike widely reported consultant  
studies for NRC58 and the Atomic Industrial Forum (AIF), 59 the GPU study  
includes estimates of the cost to dismantle each major structure-the reactor  
vessel, reactor building, auxiliary building, fuel handling building, diesel  
generators, etc.-made by the-utility in conjunction with the original architect­engineer. A recent DOE assessment, 60 moreover, found the GPU cost esti­mate, $125/kW in 1979 dollars, to be "representative of the most current  
dismantlement assessments.""  
Actual costs to decommission future reactors could exceed GPU's esti­mate. Equipment for cutting thick reactor vessel steel has not been fully  
developed (although improvements have been reported recently6 t ); more strin­gent occupational exposure regulations would increase labor requirements and  
necessitate greater use of remote-handling machinery; and "hands-on" ex­perience, especially important in nuclear work involving irradiated materials  
and environments, is almost completely lacking for decommissioning. More­over, plants under construction will contain more equipment and structures  
than GPU's reference plant and thus may require more effort to dismantle.  
Decommissioning costs in current dollars will be much greater, of  
course, due to monetary inflation. For example, decommissioning in the year  
n. The NRC and AIF consultant studies estimated dismantling costs of approximately  
$45/kW and $50-70/kW, respectively. convened from 1978 to 1979 dollars as per Reference 60.  
The NRC study, however. primarily involved "scaling up" the work involved in entombing and  
dismantling very small plants, notwithstanding the marked differences between old 20-MW  
plants and today's 1100-MW reactors (e.g., 3-inch vs. 9-inch thick reactor vessel steel). The AIF  
study omitted removal of fuel and control rods and pro'ljded for only minimum decontamination  
before dismantlement.  
Chapter II 273 2020, 40 years after construction start for a reactor assumed to begin operating  
in 1988, would cost $2000/kW, basc;d on GPU's $125/kW estimate (1979  
dollars) and assuming 7% annual inflation in labor and materials. In theory,  
however, these funds could be raised by investing a far smaller sum today  
which would appreciate during the intervening 40 years.  
NRC and state regulatory authorities are currently considering a number  
of mechanisms for financing decommissioning: issuance of bonds in interest­bearing accounts at the start of plant operation, "sinking funds" with periodic  
payments by customers, and accrual of reserves through depreciation account­ing on the utility's books as a negative net salvage value. 62 The methods vary  
considerably in their treatment of ratepayer payments, tax obligations, con­tingencies for premature decommissioning or cost overruns, etc.  
An 8% fixed charge rate is applied here to calculate the cost of decom­missioning on a per-kWh basis. This is 2.3 percentage points less than the rate  
applied to nuclear capital costs (the difference arises from eliminating the  
interim replacement allowance and property tax) and appears to be at the lower  
end of the range of fixed charge rates implied by different financing methods. 63  
It is multiplied by a 1988 decommissioning cost of$ I 37/kW (in 1979 dollars)  
calculated by escalating the base 1979 cost at I %/year (the assumed real  
escalation rate for construction work-see Chapter 12) only to 1988. At a 60%  
capacity factor, this yields a projected decommissioning cost of 2.1 mills/  
kWh-slightly less than 4.5% of total projected nuclear generating costs for  
new plants.  
References  
!. C. Komanoff, Power Plant Performance: Nuclear and Coal Capacity Factors and  
Economics (Council on Economic Priorities, New York, NY, 1976).  
2. C. Komanoff and N.A. Boxer, Nuclear Plant Performance Update (Council on  
Economic Priorities, New York, NY, 1977).  
3. C. Komanoff, Nuclear Plant Performance Update 2 (Komanoff Energy Associates,  
New York, NY, 1978).  
4. C. Komanoff, ''U.S. Nuclear Plant Performance,'' Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists,  
36 (No.9), 51-54 (November 1980).  
5, EPRl, Nuclear Unit Productivity Analysis, NP-559-SR ( 1977}, Table 2.  
6. Reference I covers data through 1975; Reference 2 adds 1976 data and responds to  
critiques; Reference 3 includes data through !977. Reference 4 reports capacity factors through  
June !980 but does not present any regression analysis.  
7. M. E. Lapides, director of 1975-77 EPRI reactor performance studies, wrote the author  
on 24 May 1976: "There is some hope for your [statistical] approach when about three times as  
much data as now exist are available ... (i.e., about four years hence)." The mid-1980 data base  
of 362 reactor-years discussed here is more than triple the author's end-of-1975 data base of 110  
reactor-years upon which Lapides commented.  
274 Chapter II 8. R.G. Easterling, Statistical Analysis of Power Plant Capacity Factors Through 1979,  
NUREG/CR- I 881, SAND 81-00 I 8 (draft, 1981 ), p. 3. Capacity factors therein, calculated with  
"generator nameplate rating," were multiplied here by 1.049 (BWRs) and 1.062 (PWRs) to  
convert to original design electrical rating.  
9. EPRI, Nuclear and Large Fossil Unit Operating Experience, NP- I 191 ( 1979), p. 4-3.  
See also Reference I, p. 72.  
10. Reference 9, p. 5-3.  
11. DOE, Cost and Quality ofFuelsfor Electric Utility Plants, 1978 and 1979 editions,  
DOE/EIA-0 19 I. Table 11 shows that the average cost of coal delivered to utilities increased from  
71 ¢/million Btu in I 974 to 122¢ in I 979. a 72% increase. (Average cost of coal burned reflects  
earlier shipments and was slightly less, 120¢.) Wholesale price inflation for the same period  
(producer price index) was 53%, giving a rea! increase of !2.3%, or 2.3% per year.  
12. DOE, Coal Data: A Reference, DOE/EIA-0064(80), Table 12.  
I 3. J .G. Baker, Determinanrs of Coal Mine Labor Productivity Change, Departments of  
Energy and Labor, DOE/IR/0056 ( 1979).  
14. The Conference Board, The Labor Outlook for the Bituminous Coal Mining Industry,  
EPRI, EA-1477 (1980).  
15. Reference 13, p. 26.  
16. Business Week, 17 November 1980, pp. 122-130, reports preliminary Labor Depart­ment data showing first-half 1980 productivity gains of 17% at deep mines and 5% at strip mines.  
17. Reference 14, Table 3-8.  
18. Reference 12 shows 1979 productivity (preliminary data) of7.9 tons per miner-day  
for deep mines and 24.8 for strip mines.  
19. Reference 13, p. 29 and pp. 33-34.  
20. Reference 14, pp. S-3 and 3-26.  
21. Thomas Falkie (former director, U.S. Bureau of Mines) in Actions ro Increase the  
Use ofCoal: Today to /990, Mitre Corporation (1978), p. 19.  
22. See "Gas Found in Nation's Coal Beds Attracts Interest as a New Source of Heating  
Fuel," Wall Street Journal, 3 I August 1977, p. 28.  
23. Reference 14, Table 6-5. The early- 1980 rate is said to be 86% below the 1977 peak,  
in • 'Both Sides Want to Avert Coal Walkout; Their Success May Decide Industry's Fate,'' Wall  
Street Journal, 8 August 1980, p. 30. See also Reference 16.  
24. Reference 14, Table 6-6.  
25. Reference 14, pp. J-2and l-3.  
26. Exxon Corp., World Energy Outlook (December 1980), p. 12.  
27. DOE, Monthly Energy Review, DOE/EIA-0035(80/! !)(November 1980), p. 2 I.  
28. Departments of Transportation and Energy, National Energy Transportation Swdy  
( 1980), pp. 37 and 65.  
29. DOE, Cost and Quality ofFuelsfor Electric Utility Plants, August/980, DOE/EIA­0075(80/08) shows a 13.9% increase in average delivered coal prices from August 1979 to  
August I 980. The index of industrial commodities rose 15.4% over the same interval, indicating  
a 1.3% inflation-adjusted decline in coal prices.  
Chapter II 275 30. Energy Information Administration. Annual Report to Congress, 1978, Vol. 3, p.  
233.  
31. EPRI, Technical Assessment Guide, PS-1201-SR (July 1979), Exhibit 6-1. non­weighted average for eight consuming regions.  
32. R.N. Bergstrom & W.W. Brandfon, Trends in Electric Generating Costs (February  
1979), p. 8, average of low- and high-sulfur coal.  
33. W.K. Davis & R.O. Sandberg, LWRs: Economics and Prospects (February 1979),  
average of levelized costs for low- and high-sulfur coal with scrubbers.  
34. Reference 30, Vol. 3, Table 13.4.  
35. Gibbs & Hill, Inc., Economic Comparison of Coal and Nuclear Electric Power  
Generation (January 1980), p. 14.  
36. DOE, Statistical Data of the Uranium Industry, January/, 1980, GJ0-100(80).  
37. Reference 30, Vol. 3, p. 220.  
38. Reference 30, Vol. 3, p. 220.  
39. MHB Technical Associates, Spent Fuel Disposal Costs (Palo Alto, CA. 1978).  
40. Wall Street Journal, 18 March 1980.  
41. Wall Street Journal, 10 November 1980.  
42. Reference 30, Vol. 3, p. 220.  
43. EIA, Steam-Electric Plant Construction Cost and Annual Production Expenses.  
1978. DOE/EIA-0033/(78). Unweighted average for all 42 reporting commercial-size nuclear  
stations in service for all of 1978.  
44. Southern Science Applications, Inc., Historical Survey of Nuclear Fuel Utilization in  
U.S. LWR Power Plants, DOE/ER/10020-TI (1979).  
45. DOE, Office of Nuclear Reactor Programs, Update, July/ August 1980, Table l,  
46. Reference 43, 1976 edition. Author's similar calculation for 1977 yielded 2.47  
mills/kWh, essentially equal to DOE figure for 1977 in Table 11.6.  
47. Bechtel National, Inc., Economic and Design Factors for Flue Gas Desulfurization  
Technology, EPRI CS-1428 ( 1980).  
48. Electrical World, 15 August 1980, p. 75.  
49. NRC, Treatment of Inflation in the Development of Discount Rates and Levelized  
Costs in NEPA Analyses for the Electric Utility Industry, NUREG-0607 (1980), Table !, column,  
"Weighted Cost of Capital, based on price earnings ratio, without inflation" (implicit price  
deflator).  
50. John R. Emshwiller, "Some Investors Shun Nuclear-Power Utilities, Jeopardizing  
Funds to Build New Atomic Plants," Wall Street Journal, 20 November 1980, p. 56.  
51. New York Public Service Commission Staff, "Brief on Exceptions in Case 80003"  
( 1979), pp. 73-76.  
52. Charles A. Benore, "Status Report," 16Aprill980,pp. l and6.  
53. EIA, Nuclear Power Regulation, DOE/EIA-0021/lO ( 1980), Tables 16 and 17.  
54. Battelle Memorial Institute, Pacific Northwest Laboratory, Technology, Safety and  
276 Chapter II Costs of Decommissioning A Reference Pressurized Water Reactor Power Station, NUREG/CR­0!30(1979), p. 2-2.  
55. NRC, Thoughts on Regulatory Changes on Decommissioning, NUREG-0590 ( 1979),  
and "The President's Program on Radioactive Waste Management," The White House, 12  
February 1980.  
56. Peter N. Skinner, New York State Attorney General's Office, Testimony, NY Public  
Service Commission, Case 26974,2 December 1977.  
57. General Public Utilities Vice-President R.C. Arnold, Testimony before the New  
Jersey Public Utility Commission, 23 October 1978.  
58. Reference 54.  
59. W.J. Manion and T.S. LaGuardia, An Engineering Evaluation of Nuclear Power  
Reactor Decommissioning Alternatives, AIF/NESP-009 (1976); updated by LaGuardia in  
Nuclear Safety, 20 (No. I), 15-23 (1979).  
60. Reference 53, p. 172. General Public Utilities' costof$101.1 million in 1978dollars  
becomes $125/kW when multiplied by I. 125 (!978· 79 industrial commodities inflation) and  
divided by the reference plant's 906-MW capacity.  
6!. Reference 59, T.S. LaGuardia.  
62. See Henry Bermanis, "How Will The Cost of Decommissioning be Funded?,"  
Nuclear Engineering International, 24 (No. II), 21-23 ( 1979).  
63. See Reference 62 or NRC, Assuring the Availability of Funds for Decommissioning  
Nuclear Facilities, NUREG-0584 ( 1979).  
Chapter II 277 12  
Nuclear And Coal  
Generating Costs  
This chapter integrates the cost components into an overall comparison  
of nuclear and coal generating costs. Capital cost projections are taken from  
Chapter 10 and the other cost factors-fuel costs, capacity factors, etc.-from  
Chapter II. Sensitivity analyses show the effects of deviating from the as·  
sumed values of different cost factors.  
Section 12.1: Analysis Ground Rules  
All costs are expressed in mid-1979 price levels. Where costs in 1978  
dollars have been taken from the literature, they have been converted to 1979  
values by adding 12.5%, the rate of inflation in industrial commodities from  
1978 to 1979. (Readers may convert I 979 prices here to 1980 levels by adding  
1979-80 inflation when that figure is published later in I 981.) Anticipated  
future real escalation, that is, price increases adjusted for inflation, has been  
projected relative to industrial_commodities inflation.>  
Where variable costs-fuel and operating and maintenance (O&M)  
costs-are assumed to escalate in real terms, they have been inflated from 1979  
to 1988 price levels at their assumed real escalation rate and then "levelized"  
at this rate over 30 years of operation. Levelized averages give greater weight  
to costs incurred in the early years of plant operation to reflect the fact that  
ratepayers value money in hand more than money in the future, even in the  
absence of inflation. A weighting factor, or "discount rate," of 3.8% per  
year-the assumed inflation-adjusted cost of money for utilities making  
nuclear investments-is employed in the levelizing calculations. (Applying  
the 3. 6% discount rate assumed for coal investments instead would have a  
negligible effect on calculated costs.)  
Calculation of the levelized average cost of coal fuel during 1988-20 I 7 is  
shown here for illustration. As discussed in Section 11.3, the delivered cost of  
a. The "producer price index" of industrial commodities inflation used here has ex­ceeded another commonly used inflation index, the GNP implicit price deflator, b,y about liz% per  
year.in recent years.  
278 Chapter 12 Levelized Averages  
The formula for !eve!ized averages is:  
t::~ /(I +r)i-t  
2:)/(1 +r)i-1  
where ai is the value of the cost factor in question in the "i 'th" year  
of operation (here, i ranges from one to 30), r is the discount rate  
(equal to .038), and I indicates the summation of the terms for  
each year over the assumed period. Where constant escalation rates  
are assumed, ai equals a1 times ( 1 +ei- 1, that is, the value of the  
cost factor in the i'th year equals its initial-year value, a 1, times an  
inflation factor( 1-el-1 compounded one, the real escalation rate.  
Use of a computer or programmable calculator is advised for  
calculating levelizing factors. Fori = .038 (used throughout this  
study), sample levelizing factors are: I . 128, fore = . 0 I; I. 367, for  
e .025; 1.677, fore= .04.  
coal is assumed to escalate from its 1979 base of 1.20¢/kilowatt-hour (kWh) at  
an average of 2.3% per year in real terms (relative to industrial commodity  
prices). The first-year (1988) coal fuel cost, in 1979 constant dollars, is then  
1.20¢ x (1.023)9 , or 1.47¢/kWh. Based on continued 2.3%/yearreal escala­tion and a 3.8%/year discount rate, a levelizing factor of 1.33 is derived. This  
is the ratio of the average fuel cost during 1988-2017 to the first-year (1988)  
cost, in real terms, based on the stated escalation and discount rates (see box).  
Multiplying this factor by the 1988 fuel cost yields a levelized average fuel cost  
of l.96¢/kWh (l.47¢ x l.33). Note that this figure is 63% greater than the  
actual 1979 fuel cost. The increase is the result of the assumed 2.3% annual  
real escalation between now and 2017.  
A different but consistent procedure is applied to capital costs to reflect  
anticipated real escalation in construction prices prior to 1988 plant comple­tion. First, projected capital costs at 1979 price levels without interest during  
construction (IDC)-$708/kW for coal and $1191/kW for nuclear {Tables  
10.1 and 10.10)-are inflated by I %/year for three and one years, respec­tively, to reflect anticipated real escalation to the assumed 1982 and 1980  
Chapter 12 279 construction start dates.0 The "Comtois formula" (Table 10.10) is then ap­plied to incorporate real escalation during construction and IDC, assuming the  
projected coal/nuclear construction periods in Table 10.2 (approximately  
six/eight years), the 3.6%/3.8% real costs of capital from Section 11.6, and  
the assumed I% real annual escalation rate. The resulting Comtois factors,  
1.148 and 1.226, respectively, are multiplied by the escalated costs to give  
capital costs in 1979 dollars of $838/kW for coal and $1460/kW for nuclear.  
Section 12.2: Base Case Results  
Table 12.1 presents cost components and total generating costs for the  
''base case'' employed throughout thls study. It includes no increase in nuclear  
capital costs specifically resulting from the Three Mile Island (TMI) accident,  
except perhaps for a slight increase to offset attrition in nuclear construction  
and the corresponding reduction in the application of new safety requirements.  
The table also incorporates the advanced pollution controls required to meet  
the extremely stringent emission standards projected for 1988 coal plants in  
Figure 7. 2. (That is, both nuclear and coal capital costs are projected with the  
statistical regressions on 1972-78 capital costs.) It also reflects 2.3% annual  
escalation in the cost of coal fuel. Note that numbers with several significant  
digits are employed in Table 12.1 and throughout this chapter for compu­tational accuracy but do not necessarily signify certainty in estimates.  
The average nuclear generating cost in Table 12. I is greater than the coal  
cost by .86¢/kWh, or 22%. Two geographical variants are also considered  
here: Northeast and West.  
Northeast: This region, compnsmg New England and the Middle  
Atlantic states, has higher costs for construction, O&M, coal fuel, and decom­missioning. The regional capital cost premiums found in the 1972-78 regres­sions-approximately 28% for nuclear and 14% for coal, relative to a Midwest  
base-appear to reflect higher wages and material costs, more difficult  
working conditions, and more stringent environmental and safety standards.  
They are applied here for future plants.c Northeast decommissioning costs rise  
in the same proportion as nuclear capital costs. O&M costs are increased by an  
arbitrary but probably conservative 15% for both plant types. 1 The coal fuel  
cost was boosted from that in Table 12. I by 23%-the 1978 differential for  
b. The Handy-Whitman index of construction prices increased during 1965-79 at an  
average rate of .64%/year for nuclear plants and. 98%/yearfor fossil plants. relative to industrial  
producer prices.  
c. Northeast and other regional capital costs are calculated directly from the nuclear and  
coal capital cost and duration regressions in Chapters 8 and 9, assuming construction in that  
region.  
280 Chapter 12 Table 12.1  
Projected Costs, 1988 Plants  
(in 1979 constant dollars)  
Nuclear  
Unit Size 1150MW  
Capital Cost $1460/kW  
Decommissioning $138/kW  
Real Fixed Charge Rate 10.3%  
Capacity Factor 60%  
Capital Cost Fixed Charges 2.86~/kWh  
Decommissioning Fixed Charges .21¢/kWh  
Fuel 1.09¢/kWh  
Operating and Maintenance .62¢/kWh  
TOTAL 4.78¢/kWh  
Nuclear/Coal Cost Ratio 1.22  
Table 12.2  
Coal  
300MW  
$838/kW  
9.8%  
70%  
1.34¢/kWh  
1.96¢/kWh  
.62¢/kWh  
3.92¢/kWh  
Northeast Nuclear And Coal Cost Factors  
(where different from Table 12.1)  
Nuclear Coal  
Capital Cost $1820/kW $936/kW  
Decommissioning $172/kW  
Capital Cost Fixed Charges 3.57¢/kWh 1.50¢/kWh  
Decommissioning Fixed Charges .26¢/kWh  
Fuel 1.09¢/kWh 2.41¢/kWh  
Operating and Maintenance .71¢/kWh .71¢/kWh  
TOTAL 5.63¢/kWh 4.62¢/kWh  
Nuclear/Coal Cost Ratio 1.22  
Chapter 12 281 Table 12.3  
Western Nuclear And Coal Cost Factors  
(where different from Table 12.1)  
Nuclear Coal  
Capital Cost $1401/kW $1033/kW  
Decommissioning $132/kW  
Capital Cost Fixed Charges 2.75~/kWh 1.65¢/kWh  
Decommissioning Fixed Charges .20¢/kWh  
Fuel 1.09¢/kWh .96¢/kWh  
TOTAL 4.66~/kWh 3.23¢/kWh  
Nuclear/Coal Cost Ratio 1.44  
New York, New Jersey, and New England. 2  
Table 12.2 shows projected Northeast costs where they differ from the  
national averages in Table 12.1. Total costs in Table 12.2 are 18% higher than  
in Table 12.1 for both nuclear and coal, preserving the 22% differential  
between the two plant types. The higher Northeast construction premium for  
nuclear plants offsets the higher Northeast coal cost.  
West: Western coal plants have higher capital costs but lower fuel  
costs. The higher capital cost-26% relative to a Midwest base, based on past  
costs-probably reflects the region's more stringent environmental standards  
and the higher cost of electrostatic precipitators designed for western low­sulfur coal. Accordingly, western coal plants are further along the "pollution  
control curve" and should experience smaller cost increases than coal plants  
elsewhere during 1978-88. Nevertheless, the 26% western capital cost pre­mium is applied here to provide a cost margin for any extraordinary measures  
to minimize emissions and other environmental impacts in clean air regions.  
Conversely, western nuclear plants are projected to cost slightly less to con­struct than the U.S. average shown in Table 12. 1, which includes a high-cost  
northeastern component.  
Coal delivered to western plants cost 51% less than the U.S. average in  
1978, 3 the result of both low mining costs and the large proportion of mine­mouth plants. This differential is applied in Table 12.3, although future plants  
in some parts of the West, such as California, will incur substantial coal  
shipping costs. Nevertheless, the average western nuclear-coal cost differen­tial of 44% shown in Table 12.3 appears sufficiently robust (twice the average  
projected for the U.S. as a whole and the Northeast) to accommodate such  
282 Chapter 12 costs, especially considering the conservative coal capital cost projection.  
Other Regions: Average costs for most other regions should not vary  
substantially from the national average in Table 12. I, based on past trends. A  
possible exception is the West South Central region (Texas and several neigh­boring states), where 1978 coal fuel and 1972-77 coal capital costs were 35%  
and 24% less, respectively, than the national averages. 4 (The former differ­ence may narrow as Wyoming coal supplements local lignite.) In the South  
(South Atlantic and East South Central regions), coal plants had 14% higher  
fuel costs than the national average in I 978, but this was offset by their 20%  
lower capital costs. 5 Similarly, Midwest coal fuel and capital costs both  
equalled the national average. Accordingly, there appears to be no region  
where the projected differential between nuclear and coal generating costs is  
less than the 22% national average in Table l2.l.ct  
Section 12.3: Sensitivity Analyses  
This section varies the cost components to measure the sensitivity of  
projected nuclear and coal generating costs to the assumed cost values. The  
base case is the national cost average in Table 12. l: coal, 3. 92¢/kWh; nuclear,  
4.78¢/kWh, or 22% higher. Calculated nuclear-coal cost ratios are shown at  
the end of each case.  
Case I. Plausible Three Mile Island Effect on Nuclear Capital Costs:  
The 1988 nuclear capital cost projection was developed from a statistical  
regression on 1972-78 reactor costs and makes little or no allowance for the  
additional regulatory impact of the Three Mile Island accident. That impact  
will be felt over a long period of time as the many items in the TMI Action Plan  
such as the degraded core rulemaking (Chapter6) are researched, debated, and  
resolved. Although any cost estimates are speculative at this time, a 50% boost  
in the increase in direct capital costs (exclusive of interest during construction)  
projected for 1978-88 appears conservative in view of the extensive scope of  
the Action Plan and the accident's severe challenge to basic regulatory prem­ises. This assumption would appear to allow for a modest slackening in the rate  
d. There is, of course, an anomaly when the projected nuclear-coal cost differential is  
higher than the national average in some regions, but is nowhere lower. The explanation lies in  
the difference between the regional weights used to project the average 1988 coal capital cost and  
the regional shares of coal burned in 1978 which make up the national average used to project coal  
fuel costs. The difference results in a high-side projection of the national average coal generating  
cost. For example, the heavy (26%) capital cost premium for western coal plants was applied to  
22% of 1988 plants-the West's anticipated share-but future coal costs were projected here  
from 1978 cost data of which the cheap coal burned in the West accounted for only 15%. The 1978  
average coal fuel cost calculated with the same weights used to calculate future capital costs is  
$1.02 per million Btu-9% less than the true national average in that year.  
Chapter 12 283 of imposition of new standards if reactor cancellations reduce future nuclear  
capacity below the mid-1980 target of 150 gigawatts (OW) used to calculate  
costs with the regression equation. Its result would be to raise the direct cost of a  
typical 1988 reactor by one-sixth, from $1191/kW to $1388/kW (1979 steam­plant dollars, without IDC).  
Under the same assumptions, TMI could cause construction durations to  
lengthen from the presently assumed 8.1 years to nine years, requiring addi­tional interest payments during construction that alone would add 2% to real  
capital costs. The average nuclear capital cost would be $1738/kW (1979  
constant dollars, including IDC and l %/year real escalation to 1990), adding  
.55¢/kWh to nuclear fixed charges and raising nuclear generating costs by 12%  
from the base case.  
The author regards this case as extremely plausible. but it is not pre­sented as a "base case" due to the lack of a methodology for estimating the  
effect of TMI on capital costs. The associated nuclear lifetime generating cost  
of 5 .33¢/kWh would be 36% higher than the coal base case cost.  
Case 2. Plausible Three Mile Island Effect on All Nuclear Costs: In  
addition to the effects on capital costs postulated in Case I, the TMI accident  
could add as much as . 5 percentage points to the real rate of return required for  
nuclear investments and also reduce the average capacity factor of new  
reactors from the 60% projected in the base case to 55%. The former would add  
. 64 percentage points to the annual real fixed charge rate and also increase  
capital costs by 2% through its effect on real interest costs. Combined with the  
addition to direct capital costs stipulated in Case I, the result would be a  
nuclear capital cost of $1778/kW (1979 constant dollars) and fixed charges of  
4.04¢/kWh, up from 2.86¢/kWh in the base case. Per-kWh decommissioning  
costs would rise proportionally with the increase in direct capital cost and the  
decrease in capacity factor, from .21¢/kWh to approximately .27¢, and O&M  
would increase by .06¢ per kWh due to the reduced capacity factoc The  
combined effect would be a 27% increase from the base case to 6.08¢/kWh  
(Nuclear/Coal = 1.55).  
A more severe assumption of capital cost escalation due to TMI, involv­ing a doubling of the extrapolated 1978-88 increases in construction cost and  
duration and resulting in a $2086/kW cost ( 1979 constant dollars), is treated in  
Section 12.4.  
Case 3. Nuclear Capacity Factor: Varying only the nuclear capacity  
factor from 60% to 55% increases base case nuclear generating costs by  
.34¢/kWh: .26¢/kWh for capital fixed charges, .02¢ for decommissioning and  
.06¢ forO&M (N/C = 1.31). Other possible nuclear capacity factors, 50%,  
65%, and 70%, yield these respective nuclear-coal cost ratios: 1.41, 1.15,  
1.08. A 78% nuclear capacity factor is required for nuclear-coal breakeven  
284 Chapter 12 under base case assumptions. A 90% nuclear capacity factor is required  
assuming the TMI capital cost impact estimated in Case I.  
Case 4. Nuclear Fixed Charge Rate: As described in Case 2, a .5  
percentage point increase in the required nuclear real rate C!f return, from 3.8 to  
4.3 percentage points, would raise the annual real fixed charge rate from  
10.3% to 10.94%. Separately, reducing plant life by five years from the  
assumed 30 would add .6 percentage points to the fixed charge rate, and  
interim replacements could easily require annual investments equal to . 7% or  
.8% of capital costs instead of the assumed .5%. A one percentage point  
increase in the fixed charge rate, whatever its origin, would add .28¢/kWh to  
fixed charges on the capital cost and .02¢ to decommissioning charges. if  
carried over to that sector (N/C = 1.30).  
Case 5. Decommissioning and Waste Disposal: In view of the virtu­ally unbroken record of real cost overruns in nuclear work involving irradiated  
materials, decommissioning costs could conceivably be twice the $138/kW  
estimate ( 1979 constant dollars) even without any TMI-caused increase in the  
complexity of the reference reactor on which the estimate was based. More­over, the effective fixed charge rate might be half again as great as the 8%  
assumed here if conservative financing methods are required to ensure that  
funds set aside for decommissioning are available at end of plant life. The  
combined effect would be a tripling of decommissioning charges, from .21 rtf  
kWh to .63¢ (N/C = 1.33).  
Waste-disposal costs-spent fuel storage, shipping, and burial-could  
also double if the cost assumptions employed in Section 11.4 prove insuffi­ciently conservative. This would add relatively little, .16¢/kWh, to nuclear  
costs, however (N/C 1.26).  
Case 6. Nuclear Fuel: Continuing declines in projected nuclear  
capacity could soften the uranium market and reduce uranium ore costs to only  
$20/lb, with no escalation, shaving fuel cycle costs by .34¢/kWh. Con­comitant increases in the economical enrichment tails assay could also reduce  
enrichment costs by as much as . I ¢/kWh. The combined reductions would cut  
total nuclear costs by 9% (N/C = l . J 1).  
Case 7. Coal Fuel Costs: Coal generating costs are most sensitive to  
the future cost of coal. Real escalation at only J% per year rather than the  
assumed 2.3%/year rate from the 1979 U.S. average cost of utility-burned coal  
would reduce coal costs by .48¢/kWh (N/C = 1.39). Conversely, real coal  
price escalation at 4%/year would add .90¢/kWh to coal costs, resulting in  
roughly equal nuclear and coal generating costs (N/C . 99).  
These comparisons exclude the effects of the TMI accident on nuclear  
costs. Incorporating the nuclear capital cost increase assumed in Case I yields  
Chapter 12 285 a I. II nuclear/coal cost ratio even with 4% annual coal price escalation.  
Adding the postulated effects ofTMI on the nuclear rate of return and capacity  
factor in Case 2 gives a cost ratio of 1.26 with 4%/year coal cost increases.  
Case 8. Coal Capacity FactOrs: Coal capacity factors might average  
60% instead of the assumed 70% if advanced emission controls interfere  
markedly with performance, if control equipment failures lead to regulatory  
restrictions, or if much larger plants than 300 MW are employed and do not  
improve on past performance. Fixed charges on capital and O&M costs would  
rise by .28¢/kWh (N/C = l. 14), assuming fixed expenses account for half of  
O&M. Capacity factors of 65% and 75% yield ratios of 1.18 and 1.25,  
respectively. A 46% coal capacity factor is required for nuclear-coal break·  
even with the other base case assumptions in Table 12. I.  
Case 9. Coal Capital Costs: Coal capital costs could exceed the $838/  
kW average projected here ( 1979 constant dollars), although Chapter 7 indi­cates that this figure would allow new plants to reduce emissions by two-thirds  
from the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) new 1979 standards. For  
plants not surpassing the EPA standards, the assumed cost includes liberal  
margins for both cost overruns on new control equipment and for presently  
unanticipated environmental requirements. Yet a I 0% addition to capital costs  
would add only . 13¢ to total coal costs in any event (N/C = l. 18). Similarly, a  
10% decline would remove .13¢ (N/C = 1.26).  
Section 12.4: Plausible Extreme Cases  
Extreme but plausible cases are shown in Table 12.4 and Figure 12. I,  
along with the base cases presented earlier and nuclear Case I. The latter  
reflects the author's judgment of the plausible impact of Three Mile Island on  
reactor costs. When like cases (base, best, and worst) are matched against each  
other, the projected nuclear/coal cost ratios are, respectively, 1.22 (base),  
1.27 (best), and 1.37 (worst). Thus, varying the cost assumptions within the  
ranges posited here tends to widen coal's projected advantage over nuclear.  
Moreover, because the best nuclear case yields a higher projected cost  
than the base coal case, unanticipated escalation in the coal sector is required to  
create a nuclear advantage. Similarly, the worst coal case is only 10% more  
costly than the base nuclear case, whereas the worst nuclear case is 84% more  
expensive than the base coal case. Finally, average nuclear costs are subject to  
greater uncertainty, with a 51% spread between base and worst case costs,  
versus 34% for coal. (This is aside from the arguably greater uncertainty in  
costs among individual reactors due to wide variations in capacity factors.)  
As stated above, these cases represent the author's judgment of plausible  
rather than possible bounds. Coal fuel costs could escalate faster than 4%/year  
286 Chapter 12 Q  
-s  
"' ...  
""'  
"' 00  
._,  
LEGEND  
Decom­mission  
O&M  
Capital  
3.20  
1.48  
Figure 12. I  
Nuclear And Coal Generating Costs, Plausible Cases  
(1979 ¢/kWh)  
Coal  
3.92  
1.96  
Base  
Case  
(most  
plausible)  
5.25  
2.86  
Case  
4.05  
~  
- ,.......,_  
Best  
Case  
(noTMI)  
Nuclear  
4.78  
illS  
Base  
Case  
(noTMI)  
Case 1  
(plausible  
TMiimpact)  
See Table 12.4 for assumptions employed in each case .  
7.20  
~  
~ ~  
Worst  
Case Table 12.4  
Breakeven Cost Calculations  
Paid-Off Share Annual Rea!  
Nuclear Coal Projected Nuclear- Of Nuclear Plant Coal Escalation  
Cases Cases Coal Cost Ratios For Breakeven For Breakeven  
BEST 1.49 55% 4.3%  
BASE BASE 1.22 30% 3.9%  
WORST 0.91 -16% 3.2%  
BEST 1.27 32% 3.1%  
BEST BASE 1.03 5% 2.6%  
WORST 0.77 -45% 1.5%  
BEST 1.67 62% 5.0%  
CASE l BASE 1.36 41% 4.7%  
WORST 1.02 2% 4.1%  
BEST 2.25 84% 7.1%  
WORST BASE 1.84 69% 6.6%  
WORST 1.37 41% 5.3%  
Nuclear Cases  
BASE: See Table 12. I (includes little or no TMl impact and 60% capacity  
factor)  
BEST: Little or no TMI impact, 65% capacity factor. and reduced uranium and  
enrichment costs in Case 6  
CASE l: TMI adds 50% to extrapolated 1978-88 increases in construction cost  
and duration  
WORST: TMI doubles extrapolated 1978-88 increases in construction cost and  
duration, adds 0.5% to real nuclear rate of return, and reduces capacity  
factor to 55%; decommissioning charges triple  
Coal Cases  
BASE: See Table 12.1 (includes 2.3%/year real fuel cost escalation and 70%  
capacity factor)  
BEST: 10% reduction in capital cost, !%/year real fuel cost escalation, and  
75% capacity factor  
WORST: 10% addition to capital cost. 4%/year real fuel cost escalation, and 60%  
capacity factor  
Two right-most columns are alternative, not simultaneous. scenarios. Paid-off  
shares are cakulated relative to nuclear capital costs for that case. Minus sign  
indicates that nuclear costs could exceed projections and still achieve bre~keven  
with coal. Breakeven coal fuel escalation rate varies relatively little with different  
coal cases because coal costs are relatively insensitive to other coal-related vari­ables. Nuclear Case l was included because of author's judgment that it is highly  
plausible. All figures assume adherence to utilities' completion of reactors with  
construction perm irs, in real terms, but this was judged to be no more likely than the possibility that  
TMI would cause more than a doubling in the extrapolated 1978-88 increase in  
nuclear capital costs. Similarly, a rise in the interim replacement allowance or  
a shortening of reactor life could increase the nuclear fixed charge rate, but this  
appeared no more probable than a uranium price break below $20/lb ( 1979  
dollars with no real escalation). Possible variation in annual O&M costs was  
also omitted because these costs account for only about 15% of total base costs.  
Most "second-order" cost impacts-e.g., effect of increased interest rates on  
nuclear fuel inventory costs, effect on real capital cost of longer construction  
durations for larger coal units-were ignored because they change total costs  
by only about I%, far less than the myriad uncertainties in future costs.  
Finally, it is of interest to calculate breakeven costs for various cases for  
two key variables: nuclear construction status, and the rate of real escalation in  
coal fuel prices from the 1979 U.S. average. The former variable is calculated  
as the percentage of the total capital cost of a new nuclear plant that a utility  
could pay for and then abandon, and still break even in lifetime generating  
costs by constructing a new coal-fired plant."  
The results, shown in Table 12.4, indicate that coal would be less  
expensive than nuclear power, even under the best nuclear case and the worst  
coal case, if real escalation in coal fuel prices dropped below 1.5% per year.  
Conversely, under the worst nuclear and best coal assumptions, coal's real  
price would need to rise by 7%/year (i.e., increasing 16-fold over the next 40  
years, adjusted for inflation) for the two plant types to have equal costs on a  
lifetime basis.  
Similarly, for the cost cases judged especially plausible by the author  
(coal base case and nuclear Case I), a utility could pay 40% of the capital cost  
of a new reactor and still break even by constructing a new coal facility instead  
of completing the nuclear plant. Even discounting any impact from TMI, as in  
the nuclear base case, a utility would need to have paid for 30% of a new  
reactor's capital cost for completion to be cost-justified, based on the assump­tions employed here. This figure would need to be revised downward, how­ever, in the event that cancellation of reactors under construction leads to a  
slackening in the rate of imposition of new regulatory requirements.  
e. Equivalently, it is the percentage of new nuclear plant construction that the utility  
would have to receive for free in order to break even with a new coal-fired plant. Although the  
calculation excludes any prospective cancellation payments to the utility's architect-engineer,  
construction contractors, and suppliers, it also omits any credits from applying completed  
construction or purchased equipment to alternative coal plants at the site or nuclear plants  
elsewhere.  
The calculation applies only to reactors undertaken today. Breakeven costs for a specific  
reactor under construction must be calculated from that reactor's projected capital cost based  
upon its individual parameters, including nuclear sector size, listed in Appendix i..  
Chapter 12 289 References  
!. DOE, Office of Nuclear Reactor Programs, Update, July/ August 1980, Part Ill, Table  
3, indicates that 1979 nuclearO&M costs-admittedly a thin sample-were approximately 40%  
higher for Northeast and 50% higher for mid-Atlantic plants than for other reactors.  
2. E!A, Cost and Quality of Fuels for Electric Utility P/ants-1978, DOE/EIA-0191  
(78), indicates 1978 delivered coal costs of $1.371 per million Btu for New York. New Jersey,  
and New England; and $1. 116 for all U.S. The Pennsylvania average of $1.163 for a far greater  
quantity of coal was excluded from this calculation, although the Northeast region as defined here  
includes Pennsylvania.  
3. Reference 2 indicates $.551 per million Btu for Pacific and Mountain States.  
4. Reference 2 indicates$. 729 per million Btu for Texas. Oklahoma. and Arkansas. The  
capital cost differential is from Table 9.!. Both the fuel and construction cost differentials are  
based overwhelmingly on data for Texas.  
5. Reference 2, with a $1.269 per million Btu average coal cost; and Table 9. I.  
290 Chapter 12 Appendix 1  
Nuclear Data Base  
Operating Reactors  
The nuclear data base comprises 50 reactors. Forty-six are used in the  
cost analysis and 49 in the construction duration analysis. Criteria used to  
define and compile the data base are described in Section 8. I .  
The data base is presented below. Fifty-two units are listed, including  
Diablo Canyon 1 and 2, incomplete units licensed during the same period as the  
other reactors. (Listed further below are the 82 other reactors with construction  
permits in order of the date of construction permit award.)  
The following text describes information sources and important features  
of the data.  
Reactor Name and Vendor: Reactors are listed in sequence of construc­tion permit award from the Atomic Energy Commission, with one exception:  
Browns Ferry 3 is listed directly following units 1 and 2, despite receiving its  
construction permit 14 months later. The single letter following the plant name  
denotes the nuclear reactor vendor: B for Babcock & Wilcox, C for Combus­tion Engineering, G for General Electric, and W for Westinghouse.  
Key Dates: Listed in succession are dates of reactor order (NSSS).  
construction permit application (CPAP), construction permit issuance (CPIS),  
and commercial operation (CO). All are drawn from U.S. Central Station  
Nuclear Electric Generating Units: Significant Milestones (DOE/NE-0030),  
except for the CO dates of St. Lucie 1 and Trojan, both taken from licensees'  
originally reported CO dates in NRC Operating Units Status Reports (Gray  
Books) prior to revision. The CO dates of four incomplete units that are  
included in the duration data base but are not in the cost data base are listed in  
parentheses as estimated by author absent startup delays caused by the Three  
Mile Island accident (see Section 8.2).  
MW Capacity is unit's design electrical rating in megawatts (MW) as  
originally reported in NRC Operating Units Status Reports.  
OPEX is cumulative number of operating reactor years for the U.S.  
commercial nuclear sector on date each unit received its operating license. It is  
employed only in an alternative regression model of capital cost discussed in  
Section 8.1  
CumCap, or sector size, is the cumulative capacity of U.S. commercial  
reactors operating or under construction. It is determined by adding the  
Appendix I 29! reactor's own capacity to the cumulative capa~;ity for the previously licensed  
reactor.  
A-E is the number of reactors built by the architect-engineer of the plant  
in question, including that plant. Multiple units (see below) are assigned the  
same A-E number. The letter "S" denotes a case in which the utility acted as  
its own (selt) A-E-a variable tested in an alternative regression model ex­amined in Section 8.!. The A-E number used for all such cases in the primary  
regression (Table 8.1) was one, since each was the utility's first venture as its  
own reactor A-E.  
CT (Cooling Tower) refers to the use of closed-cycle cooling towers,  
denoted by the letter "T."  
Multiple Units, identical (or nearly so) plants built at a shared site within  
approximately two years of each other, are denoted by "P" for the first unit  
(prototype) and "D'' for subsequent duplicate units. Brunswick I and 2 are,  
respectively, duplicate and prototype because of the utility's reversal of their  
construction sequence. Four first-of-a-pair plants with incomplete second  
units are denoted as "I'' (initial units); they were assigned special status in the  
cost regression as "dangling" units because of unusually high costs probably  
associated with their incomplete partner units. Absent this special varjable, the  
measured rate of cost increase with growth in nuclear sector size would have  
been larger than shown in Table 8. 1.  
Region is either Northeast (NE), Southeast (SE), Midwest (M) or West  
(W). There were no South Central reactors in the nuclear data base.  
Costs, in succession, are plant cost in conventional, ''mixed current"  
dollars (including interest during construction, or IDC), a~d in'' 1979 steam­plant" dollars, without !DC, both in thousands; and ih~ s'ame respective  
measures divided by plant capacity for expression as dollars per kilowatt. The  
procedure for converting mixed dollars to 1979 steam:plailt dollars is de­scribed in Appendix 3. The data sources for the mix~d-dollar ~osts are de­scribed below.  
Note that, for multiple units, the 1979 steam-plant dollar costs actually  
used as the dependent variable in the regression an'\iysis were the average of  
the costs shown for the members of that set of identic:al units. Thus, the cost of  
Oconee I, 2, and 3, for example, was the average of their separate costs in  
1979 steam-plant dollars-$324/kilowatt, $307/kW, and $299/kW-or $310/  
kW. The rationale for this averaging procedure is stated in Section 8. 1.  
Time is construction time-CO date minus Cf'IS date. It is the dependent  
variable in the duration analysis. Entries in parentheses are the construction  
times of four incomplete units estimated absent the Thre~ Mile Island accident,  
as noted above. Not shown here, but tested and found to Jack statistical  
significance as an explanatory variable in the cost analysis, was licensing time:  
CPIS minus CPAP  
Deviations from Norm: These entries are the differences between a  
reactor's cost (in 1979 steam-plant dollars without IDC) or construction time  
292 Appendix I and the cost or time predicted by the regression equations (Tables 8. I and 8.4)  
on the basis of the reactor's MW capacity, A-E experience, sector size, and  
other statistically significant variables. The+ 12.9 and -2.0 entries for Peach  
Bottom 3 (unit 12 in the data base), for example, indicate that the reactor cost  
12.9% more (in adjusted, constant dollars without IDC) but took 2.0% less  
time to build than expected for a I 065-MW, duplicate unit with a cooling tower  
in the Northeast which was the eleventh reactor built by an A-E and which  
brought cumulative nuclear capacity to 20,707 MW when it was licensed. The  
cost deviations correspond to the distances in Figure 8. I between each  
reactor's adjusted cost and the 46-plant trend line.  
Some deviation figures may appear anomalous until their characteristics  
(values of their explanatory variables) are considered. For example, although  
Vermont Yankee's cost of $693/kW (1979 steam-plant dollars without IDC)  
was far greater than that of other reactors licensed up to that time, its cost was  
5.2% less than the predicted cost. The explanation is that Vermont Yankee's  
characteristics-small capacity, low A-E number, not a multiple unit, with a  
cooling tower, in the Northeast-are all correlated with higher costs, and  
therefore the plant would have been expected to have a very high cost in any  
event.  
The deviation figures do not necessarily measure cost or time overruns,  
since the norm from which the deviations are measured-commercial reactor  
construction experience-itself is characterized by chronic overruns. In addi­tion, use of the figures as a barometer of construction performance implies that  
characteristics which were correlated to costs, such as A-E experience or plant  
size, were outside the utility's control, when such was not the case. Moreover,  
the cost deviations do not reflect real interest during construction, which is  
proportional to construction time. Granting these limitations, however, the  
deviation figures are a good indicator of the skill with which utilities coped  
with the industry-wide problems involved in constructing nuclear plants in the  
late 1960s and the 1970s.  
The construction time deviations for the four incomplete reactors are  
shown in parentheses, since they are based on hypothetical durations estimated  
without the Three Mile Island accident. No deviation is given for Farley l,  
since it was excluded from the duration regression analysis for the reason given  
in Section 8. I.  
Source gives the data source for each reactor's cost in mixed current  
dollars. The year refers to the issue number of Steam-Electric Plant Construc­tion Cost and Annual Production Expenses (DOE/EIA-0033), a compilation of  
data from utility "Forrn I" reports published for many years by the Federal  
Power Commission and now issued by the Energy Information Administra­tion. For reasons explained in Section 8.1, the edition for the year following  
initial commercial service was used as the data source, with several excep­tions. Where multiple units were completed a year apart, the first unit's cost  
was obtained from the report for its year of completion in order to measure the  
Appendix I 293 unit's cost before the second unit's cost was added. Some 1977 units' costs  
were obtained from the 1977 edition because the 1978 report was not published  
until December 1980. The '' 1978'' entry for two 1978 units indicates that costs  
were compiled by the author from utilities' 1978 Form I reports.  
Costs for five units were obtained by direct communication with the  
utility, as follows:  
Browns Ferry 3: Larry Knott, Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)  
power generation section, reported Browns Ferry station cost of $885,990,900  
as of 30 September 1978 (end of TV A's 1978 fiscal year) (telephone communi­Nuclear Plant  
Dates  
Reactor Vendor NSSS CPAP CPIS co MW OPEX CumCap  
Palisades c 66.00 66.42 67.17 71.92 821 13 10621  
2 Turkey Point 3 w 65.83 66.17 67.25 72.92 745 29 11366  
3 Turkey Point 4 w 67.25 66.17 67.25 73.67 745 43 12111  
4 Browns Ferry I G 66.42 66.50 67.33 74.58 1098 47 13209  
5 Browns Ferry 2 G 66.42 66.50 67.33 75.17 1098 75 14307  
6 Browns Ferry 3 G 67.42 67.50 68.50 77.17 1098 168 15405  
7 Oconee I B 66.50 66.83 67.83 73.50 886 39 16291  
8 Oconee 2 B 66.50 66.83 67.83 74.67 886 55 17177  
9 Oconee 3 B 67.33 67.25 67.83 74.92 886 78 18063  
10 Vennont Yankee G 66.58 66.83 67.92 72.83 514 24 18577  
II Peach Bottom 2 G 66.58 67.08 68.00 74.50 1065 51 19642  
12 Peach Bottom 3 G 66.58 67.08 68.00 74.92 1065 78 20707  
13 Diablo Canyon I w 66.83 67.00 68.25 1084 21791  
14 Three Mile Is. I B 66.83 67.33 68.33 74.67 819 70 22610  
15 Surry 1 w 66.75 67.17 68.42 72.92 823 26 23433  
16 Surry 2 w 66.75 67.17 68.42 73.33 823 38 24256  
17 Fort Calhoun c 66.75 67.25 68.42 73.67 457 45 24713  
18 Prairie Island I w 67.08 67.17 68.42 73.92 530 51 25243  
19 Prairie Island 2 w 67.42 67.17 68.42 74.92 530 87 25773  
20 Cooper G 67.25 67.50 68.42 74.50 778 62 26551  
21 Pilgrim I G 65.58 67.42 68.58 72.92 670 28 27221  
22 Kewaunee w 67.08 67.58 68.58 74.42 560 60 27781  
294 Appendix I cation, 19 March 1979). Unit I and 2 costs were subtracted from total to obtain  
Unit 3 cost.  
Crystal River 3: Letter from R.R. Hayes, vice president and controller,  
Florida Power Corp., 4 April 1979.  
Indian Point 3 and Fitzpatrick: Discussions with staff of Power Au­thority of State of New York, March 1978.  
Davis-Besse I: Letter from J. R. Dyer, public relations, Toledo Edi­son, 14June 1979.  
DataBase  
Costs (000) Costs ($/kW) Time Deviations  
A-E CT Mult. Reg. Mixed 1979 Mixed 1979 (yrs.) $/kW Time Source ------- 
5 T M 146690 301132 179 367 4.75 +2.5 +2.7 1972  
6 p SE 108710 209590 146 281 5.67 +4.8 +24.7 1972  
6 D SE 126786 229320 170 308 6.42 +1.0 +16.0 1974  
s T p SE 276179 471816 252 430 7.25 +2.7 +0 1976  
s T D SE 276179 451853 252 412 7.84 -1.9 -11.4 1976  
s T D SE 333633 461835 304 421 8.67 -6.0 -3.3 see text  
8 p SE 155610 286929 176 324 5.67 -4.4 -3.7 1973  
8 D SE 160420 272075 181 307 6.84 -7.3 -4.3 1974  
8 D SE 160420 265016 181 299 7.09 -9.9 1.7 1974  
3 T NE 184480 356022 359 693 4.91 -5.2 -4.1 1973  
II T p NE 376990 646767 354 607 6.50 +16.4 +11.8 1975  
]] T D NE 376990 627579 354 589 6.92 + 12.9 -2.0 1975  
s p w  
2 T NE 400928 677737 490 828 6.34 +6.3 17.8 1975  
3 p SE 146710 281054 178 341 4.50 +2.1 -22.6 1972  
3 D SE 255386 475497 310 578 4.91 +0.1 -30.3 1974  
M 175800 319605 385 699 5.25 +7.7 +10.8 !974  
T p M 233230 415304 440 784 5.50 -3.0 -0.9 1973  
T D M !76977 292094 334 551 6.50 -4.2 -3.0 !975  
3 M 269287 458797 346 590 6.08 +8.8 +18.2 1975  
13 NE 239330 462038 357 690 4.34 + 11.3 -6.6 1973  
M 203389 349178 363 624 5.84 -6.5 + 12.2 1975  
Appendix 1 295 Reactor  
23 Salem I  
24 Salem 2  
25 Crystal River 3  
26 Maine Yankee  
27 Rancho Seco  
28 Zion l  
29 Zion 2  
30 Arkansas I  
31 Cook I  
32 Cook2  
33 Calvert Cliffs I  
34 Calvert Cliffs 2  
35 Indian Point 3  
36 Hatch I  
37 Three Mile Is. 2  
38 Brunswick 2  
39 Brunswick l  
40 Fitzpatrick  
41 Sequoyah I  
42 Sequoyah 2  
43 Duane Arnold  
44 Beaver Valley I  
45 St. Lucie I  
46 Millstone 2  
47 Diablo Canyon 2  
48 Trojan  
49 North Anna l  
50 North Anna 2  
5 I Davis-Besse I  
52 Farley I  
296  
Dates  
Vendor NSSS CPAP CPIS CO MW OPEX CumCap  
w  
w  
B  
c  
B  
w  
w  
B  
w  
w  
c  
c  
w  
G  
B  
G  
G  
G  
w  
w  
G  
w  
c  
c  
w  
w  
w  
w  
B  
w  
66.58 66.92 68.67 77.42 1090  
67.33 67.75 68.67 (79.92) 1115  
67.08  
67.08  
67.58  
67.08  
67.50  
67.25  
67.50  
67.50  
67.33  
67.33  
67.25  
67.92  
67.08  
68.00  
68.00  
68.92  
68.25  
68.25  
68.08  
67.67  
67.92  
67.92  
68.50  
68.83  
67.75  
67.75  
68.75  
69.33  
67.58  
67.67  
67.83  
67.50  
67.58  
67.83  
67.92  
67.92  
68.00  
68.00  
67.25  
68.33  
68.25  
68.50  
68.50  
68.92  
68.75  
68.75  
68.83  
69.00  
69.00  
69.08  
68.42  
69.42  
69.17  
69.17  
69.50  
69.75  
68.67  
68.75  
68.75  
68.92  
68.92  
68.92  
69.17  
69.17  
69.50  
69.50  
69.58  
69.67  
69.83  
70.08  
70.08  
70.33  
70.33  
70.33  
70.42  
77.17 825  
72.92 790  
75.25 913  
73.92 1050  
74.67 1050  
74.92 850  
75.58 1090  
78.50 1100  
75.33 845  
77.25 845  
76.58 965  
75.92 786  
78.92 906  
75.83 821  
77.17 821  
75.50 821  
(80.08) 1148  
(80.75) 1148  
75.08 538  
70.42 76.75 852  
70.50 76.42 810  
70.92 75.92 828  
70.92 1106  
71.08 75.92 1130  
71.08 78.42 907  
71.08 (79. 92) 907  
71.17 77.83 906  
72.58 77.92 829  
172  
190  
32  
81  
43  
57  
72  
87  
246  
78  
172  
140  
81  
256  
94  
177  
87  
65  
144  
152  
128  
136  
265  
208  
218  
28871  
29986  
30811  
31601  
32514  
33564  
34614  
35464  
36554  
37654  
38499  
39344  
40309  
41095  
42001  
42822  
43643  
44464  
45612  
46760  
47298  
48150  
48960  
49788  
50894  
52024  
52931  
53838  
54744  
55573  
Appendix I Costs I IIIlO\  
A-E CT Mult. Reg. Mixed 1979 ----- ----- s  
s  
3  
5  
14 T  
5  
5  
!5  
s  
s  
16  
16  
2  
18 T  
T  
NE 850318 1162439  
D NE  
SE 419080 582097  
NE 219230 418770  
w 343620 552327  
P M 275990 491444  
D M 291997 490132  
SE 238751 394748  
P M 544650 854421  
D M 451527 556374  
P NE 430674 689726  
D NE 335321 461459  
NE 570000 829042  
SE 390390 594667  
NE 715466 853680  
P SE 389118 596315  
D SE 318442 438237  
NE 419000 653173  
4  
3  
3  
6  
4  
4  
T P SE  
T D SE  
19 T  
7  
4  
20  
T  
M 279928 453629  
NE 598716 855653  
SE 486230 71 1866  
NE 426271 649323  
S D W  
21 T  
8  
8  
22 T  
23 T  
Appendix 1  
w 451980 683257  
SE 781739 966977  
D SE  
M 672452 866772  
SE 727426 922905  
Costs 1$/kV\1 Time Deviations  
:1-lixed 1979 1~·rs.1 $/kW Time Source  
780 1066 8.75 +4.2 + 17.9 1977  
508  
278  
376  
263  
278  
281  
500  
410  
510  
397  
591  
497  
790  
474  
388  
510  
520  
(11.25) (+24.!)  
706 8.50 +20.9 + !8.! see text  
530 4.!7 -26.6 -25.9 1973  
605 6.50 +0.8 +4.9 1975  
468 5.00 -6.6 -11.5 1973  
467 5. 75 -8.2 -!5. 9 1975  
464 6.00 12.6 -3.9 1975  
784 6.41 +4.4 -7.8 1976  
506 9.33 +2.8 + 10.6 1978  
816 5.83 +6. 7 + 10.9 1976  
546 7.75 +5.4 +22.0 1977  
859 7.00 -2.3 +0 see text  
757 6.25 - 18.3 +8.5 1976  
942 9.09 -7.1 +9.5 1978  
726 5.75 -1.2 -11.5 1976  
534 7.09 -2.3 -9.6 1977  
796 5.17 -7.1 -13.2 seetext  
(9. 75)  
( !0.42)  
( +22.8)  
( +8.6)  
843 4.66 +5.2 +3.1 1976  
703 1004 6.33 -4.1 -5.0 1977  
600  
515  
400  
879 5.92 + 18.3 -7.8 1977  
784 5.00 -2.5 -6.4 1976  
605 4.84 -!6.3 -18.5 1976  
862 1066 7.34 + 12.3 + 16.8 1978  
(8.84) (+16.6)  
742 957 6.66 +23.6 +2.9 seetext  
877 1113 5.34 +4.7 1977  
297 Reactors Under Construction  
Below is a list of the 82 reactors holding construction permits as of  
February 1981, arranged in sequence of construction permit award. Their unit  
size, architect-engineer experience, and cumulative nuclear sector capacity  
are listed to enable readers to calculate projected plant costs and construction  
durations using the nuclear cost and duration regressions (Tables 8. I and 8.4).  
(Other parameters that correlated significantly with costs and construction  
times-Northeast location, multiple units, and cooling towers-are not  
listed.) Readers are cautioned that costs calculated with the regression are in  
1979 steam-plant dollars without interest during construction, rather than the  
mixed-current dollars in which capital costs are usually expressed (Appendix 3  
and Table 10. 10 will aid in converting costs). The regressions also do not  
reflect the effect of the Three Mile Island accident or of deliberate stretchouts  
of construction on reactor costs and schedules.  
The reactor numbers-68 through !53-reflect the 52 reactors listed in  
the complete data base and the I 5 commercial reactors that precede the data  
base. The latter are, in construction permit sequence: San Onofre I, Con­necticut Yankee, Oyster Creek, Nine Mile Point I, Dresden 2, Ginna, Mill­stone I, Dresden 3, Indian Point 2, Quad Cities I and 2, Robinson 2, Monti­cello, and Point Beach l and 2.  
The list of plants under construction shows four licensed units which  
utilities cancelled in 1980: Forked River, North Anna 4, Sterling, and Tyrone.  
Their capacities had been included in calculating the sector size of 149,648  
MW used to project the cost of a standard !988 nuclear plant in Chapter !0.  
Projected costs would be 1.6% less if calculated from the currently projected  
sector size of 145,421 MW which is the cumulative capacity for Yellow Creek  
2, the last unit listed below.  
Reactors Under Construction  
CPissue  
Reactor Date MW CumCap A·E  
68 Farley2 08/72 829 56,402 23  
69 Fermi2 09172 1093 57.495 7  
70 Zimmer l 10/72 810 58,305 8  
71 Arkansas 2 12/72 912 59,~17 25  
72 Hatch2 12172 795 60.012 26  
73t Midland I 12/72 811 60.823 27  
74 Midland2 12/72 811 61,634 27  
298 Appendix 1 CPissue  
Reactor Date MW CumCap A·E  
75 Watts Bar I 01/73 1177 62.811 6  
76 Watts Bar2 01173 1177 63,988 6  
77 McGuire I 02/73 1180 65,168  
78 McGuire 2 02173 1180 66,348  
79 Summer I 03/73 900 67,248 4  
80 WPPSS2 03/73 1100 68,348 5  
81 Shoreham 04/73 819 69,167 10  
82* Forked River 07173 1070  
83 LaSalle County 1 09/73 1078 70,245 9  
84 LaSalle County 2 09173 1078 71,323 9  
85 San0nofre2 10/73 1100 72,423 29  
86 San Onofre 3 10173 1100 73,523 29  
87 Susquehanna I 11/73 1050 74,573 31  
88 Susquehanna 2 11173 1050 75,623 31  
89 Bailly 05/74 643 76,266 II  
90 Beaver Valley 2 05/74 833 77,099 II  
91 Limerick I 06/74 1065 78,164. 33  
92 Limerick 2 06174 1065 79,229 33  
93 Nine Mile Point 2 06/74 1100 80,329 12  
94 Vogtle I 06/74 1110 81,439 35  
95 Vogtle 2 06{74 1110 82,549 35  
96 North Anna 3 07/74 907 83,456 13  
97* North Anna 4 07/74 907  
98 Millstone 3 08/74 1158 84,614 14  
99 Grand Gulf l 09/74 1250 85,864 37  
100 Grand Gulf2 09174 1250 87,114 37  
!OJ Hope Creek I 11/74 1067 88,181 39  
102 HopeCreek2 11/74 1067 89,248 39  
103 Waterford 3 11/74 1113 90,361 5  
104 Bellefonte J 12/74 1213 91,574 8  
105 Bellefonte 2 12/74 1213 92,787 8  
106 Comanche Peak I 12/74 J II J 93,898 2  
107 Comanche Peak 2 12/74 1111 95,009 2  
Appendix 1 299 CP Issue  
Reactor Date MW Cum Cap A·E  
108 Catawba I 08175 1145 96,154 3  
109 Catawba 2 08/75 1145 97,299 3  
110 Braidwood l 12/75 1120 98,419 12  
Ill Braidwood 2 12/75 1120 99,539 12  
112 Byron l 12/75 1120 100,659 14  
113 Byron 2 12175 1120 101,779 14  
114 South Texas l 12/75 1250 103,029  
115 South Texas 2 12/75 1250 104,279  
116 WPPSS 1 12/75 1218 105,497 5  
117 Clinton l 02/76 933 106,430 16  
118 Clinton 2 02/76 933 107,363 16  
119 Callaway I 04/76 1120 108.483 41  
120 Callaway 2 04/76 1120 109,603 41  
121 Palo Verde I 05!76 1270 l 10,873 43  
122 Palo Verde 2 05176 1270 112,143 43  
123 Palo Verde 3 05/76 1270 113,413 43  
124 S_eabrook 1 07{76 1200 114,613 7  
125 Seabrook2 07/76 1200 115,813 7  
126 River Bend I 03/77 934 116,747 15  
127 River Bend 2 03/77 934 I 17,681 15  
128 Hartsville A I 05/77 1233 I 18,914 10  
129 Hartsville A 2 05/77 1233 120,147 10  
130 Hartsville B I 05/77 1233 121,380 10  
131 Hartsville B 2 05/77 1233 122,613 10  
132 Perry I 05/77 1205 123,818 5  
133 Perry 2 05/77 1205 125,023 5  
!34 St. Lucie 2 05/77 8!0 125,833 6  
135 WolfCreek 05/77 I 150 126,983 46  
136* Sterling 09/77 1150  
137 Cherokee I 12{77 1280 128,263 5  
!38 Cherokee 2 12177 1280 129,543 5  
!39 Cherokee 3 !2/77 1280 130,823 5  
300 Appendix 1 CP Issue  
Reactor Date MW CumCap A·E  
140* Tyrone I2/77 I IOO  
14 I Phipps Bend I OI/78 1233 132,056 14  
I42 Phipps Bend 2 01/78 1233 133,289 14  
143 Harris! 01/78 900 134,189 7  
144 Harris 2 01/78 900 I35,089 7  
145 Harris 3 OI/78 900 135,989 7  
146 Harris 4 OI/78 900 I36,889 7  
147 WPPSS4 OI/78 1218 138,107 5  
148 Marble Hill I 02/78 I 130 139,237 18  
149 MarbleHill2 02/78 1130 140,367 18  
!50 WPPSS3 04178 1242 141,609 II  
!51 WPPSSS 04178 1242 142,851 II  
!52 Yellow Creek I I 1/78 1285 144,136 16  
!53 Yellow Creek 2 11/78 1285 145,421 16  
*Denotes cancelled unit.  
tMidland I is a steam· and power-producing unit with a 460-MW electrical  
capacity. Its electrical-equivalent capacity is shown here.  
Appendix 1 301 Appendix2  
Coal Data Base  
The coal data base comprises 116 coal-fired generating units. All are  
employed in the cost analysis, and 92 are used in the construction duration  
analysis. Criteria used to define and compile the data base are described in  
Section 9. I .  
The data base is presented below. The following text describes informa­tion sources and important features of the data.  
Plant Name, Utility, and Key Dates: Coal plants are listed in sequence  
of boiler order as compiled in the Kidder Peabody data base (see Section 9. I).  
Utility owners (or lead owner in the case of joint ventures) are also listed  
(utility names were excluded from the list of reactors in Appendix I because  
they are available from numerous sources). The CO date is the utility's  
declared date of initial commercial service as reported in Steam-Electric Plant  
Construction Cost and Annual Production Expenses (DOE/EIA-0033,  
annual).  
MW Capacity is the unit's nameplate generator rating reported in the  
Steam-Electric Plant reports just cited.  
Multiple Units, identical (or nearly so) plants built at a shared site within  
approximately two years of each other, are assigned one of three designations:  
"P" (prototype) for first units with a subsequent duplicate also in the data  
base, "D" (duplicate) for duplicate units, and "I" (initial) for first units  
whose follow-on partners were not completed in time to enter the data base.  
Both prototype and duplicate units are referred to in this study as multiple  
units. As explained in Chapter 9, the costs in constant dollars of the members  
of a set of multiple units were averaged to smooth fluctuations in the allocation  
of costs within each set. (In a slight variant of this procedure for the Winyah  
station, the cost in constant dollars of unit 2 was made 26.5% greater than unit  
I 's cost to adjust for the fact that only unit 2 has a scrubber.) Multiple units  
averaged approximately 10% less cost than non-multiple units (see Section  
9. I). Costs of so-called initial units did not differ from those of other one-of-a­kind units in the sample. Note that "add-on" units sharing a site with earlier  
units were not classified as multiple units unless they matched the capacity and  
general design features of their immediate predecessor.  
SOz control devices, or scrubbers, are denoted by "S." Table 9.4 lists  
the I 5 data base units with scrubbers along with SOz design removal efficiency  
and coal sulfur content.  
302 Appendix 2 CumCap, or sector size, is the cumulative capacity of utility coal units  
operating or under construction. It is determined by adding 95% of the unit's  
own capacity (allowing for retirements equalling 5% of new construction) to  
the cumulative capacity of the previous plant in the boiler-order sequence.  
Beginning with the 9ist unit, the cumcap figure also incorporates the capac­ities of coal plants ordered prior to each new unit but completed in 1978, the  
first year following the sample period. Sixteen such units totalling 8804 MW  
(without the 5% reduction described above) are reflected in the sector-size  
figure for the last sample plant, although ten of the 16 enter the capacity total  
only for the last four plants in the data base.  
Regions are Northeast (NE), Southeast (SE), Midwest (M). South Cent­ral (SC), and West (W).  
Company variables that were correlated with capital cost were ownership  
by American Electric Power (AEP) or the Southern Company. The former,  
shown in the utility listings, are units numbered 12, 38, 46, 54, and !02. The  
latter, listed under the names of company subsidiaries Alabama Power,  
Georgia Power, Gulf Power, and Mississippi Power, are numbers 16, 24, 36,  
37, 56, 57, 67, 77, 78, and 91.  
Costs, in succession, are plant cost in conventional, as-reported "mixed  
current" dollars (including interest during construction, or IDC), and in  
"1979 steam-plant" dollars, without !DC, both in thousands; and the same  
respective measures divided by plant capacity for expression as dollars per  
kilowatt. The procedure for converting mixed dollars to 1979 steam-plant  
dollars is described in Appendix 3. Costs for four units, numbered 33, 73, 89,  
and 116, were reported by utilities without IDC, and therefore only inflation  
was subtracted in converting their costs to 1979 steam-plant dollars.  
For multiple units, the costs employed in the regression analysis were the  
averages of the costs, in 1979 steam-plant dollars, of the members of each  
multiple-unit set. This procedure was also applied to duplicate (second or  
later) units whose unit I forerunners preceded the data base. Following are the  
boiler order date, commercial operation date, reported capital costs in mixed  
current dollars, and adjusted cost in 1979 steam-plant dollars of the eight  
non-data base units whose constant-dollar costs were averaged with those of  
their duplicate successors in the data base.  
Boiler Commercial Reported Adjusted Costs  
Unit Order Operation Costs ($000) (1979$000)  
Amos I 67.42 71.67 128.331 281,626  
Bowen I 67.67 71.50 92,525 204.949  
Cayuga I 66.67 70.75 80.028 I85.115  
Big Bend I 66.75 70.75 71.286 164.903  
Big Brown I 67.67 71.92 86, I 53 185.883  
Appendix 2 303 Monroe I  
Stuart I  
Stuart 2  
67.00  
65.92  
66.25  
71.42  
70.75  
71.33  
176,260  
92,864  
92,864  
392,996  
214,462  
208,150  
Time is project time from boiler order to commercial operation. It is the  
dependent variable in the coal duration analysis.  
Deviations from Norm: These entries are the differences between the  
unit's cost (in 1979 steam-plant dollars without IDC) or project duration and  
the cost or duration predicted by the respective regression equations (Tables  
9. I and 9. 7). A plus sign indicates that a plant cost more (or took longer) to  
construct than would have been expected on the basis of its sector-size value,  
location, use of a scrubber, etc. Several caveats expressed in Appendix I  
(nuclear plants) apply here: deviations for costs (but not for durations) of  
multiple units were calculated on the basis of the average constant-dollar cost  
for that multiple-unit set, not from the costs shown in the data base; cost  
deviations do not reflect higher real IDC for plants with longer construction  
times; in some instances, the deviations in construction times reflect a particu­lar utility's need, or lack thereof, to complete plants rapidly to meet load  
growth; and the capital cost deviations are adjusted for the lower and higher  
costs, respectively, of plants built by the Southern Company and American  
Electric Power. Bearing these limitations in mind, the deviation figures are a  
useful measure of utilities' skill in constructing plants economically and  
expeditiously.  
Not shown in the data base listings are several variables that were tested  
for, but failed to demonstrate, statistical significance in regressions on capital  
cost or construction duration. They are: supercritical boiler (design steam  
pressure), boiler manufacturer, use of a cooling tower, heat content of fuel  
used, and ownership by a publicly held utility. Listings for these variables are  
available by special arrangement with the author.  
Also not shown is the source of each plant's cost in mixed current dollars.  
Costs were generally obtained from the edition of the federal Steam-Electric  
Plant report for the year in which a unit was declared commercially opera­tional. Because the 1976 and 1977 editions of the report were not available  
when the author began to compile these data in mid-1978, costs for 1976 and  
1977 units were obtained from utility ''Form I'' reports on file at the Federal  
Energy Regulatory Commission. Exceptions to this procedure, in which the  
author relied upon direct communication with the utility, are as follows,  
tabulated by units' data base sequence numbers:  
No. 4 (Montour 1): Capital cost, exclusive of gas turbine units, was  
reported in letter to author, 27 July 1978.  
Nos. 5, 60 and 61 (Big Brown 2, Monticello I and 2): Separate capital  
costs for each individual unit and for Big Brown I (completed prior to data base  
period but needed to average constant-dollar costs with Big Brown 2) were  
304 Appendix 2 reported in letterto author, 24 July 1978.  
No. 31 (Stout 7): Capital cost, exclusive of gas turbine units, was  
reported in letter to author, 19 July 1978.  
No. 63 (Smith 2): Capital cost not in FPC/EIA reports, was reported in  
letter to author, 17 July 1978.  
No. 73 (Drake 7): Capital cost not in FPC/EIA reports, was reported in  
letter to author, 5 July 1979.  
Nos. 89 and 116 (Winyah 1 and 2): Separate capital costs for individual  
units were reported in letter to author, 27 July 1978.  
No. 94 (Duck Creek 1): 1976-reported cost was supplemented by  
$13,909,000 spent in 1977-78 to complete scrubber, as reported in letter to  
author, 5 March 1979.  
No. 95 (Hayden 2): Capital cost not in FPC/EIA reports, was reported in  
letter to author, 16 August 1978.  
No. 10 I (Deely 1): Joint capital cost for Deely I and 2 (latter was  
completed after data base period) was reported as $246,998,389 in letter to  
author, 19 July 1978; author subtracted reported cost of $30,175,633 for  
railroad cars and railroad car maintenance facility, and halved remainder to  
obtain cost for Deely I.  
No. 102 (Cardinal 3 ): Capital cost not in FPC/EIA reports, was reported  
in letter to author, 16 August 1978.  
No. 108 (Southwest 1): Capital cost not in FPC/EIA reports, was re­ported in letter to author, 19 July 1978.  
No. 113 (Young 2): Capital cost not in FPC/EIA reports, was reported in  
Ietterto author, 31 August 1978,  
Appendix 2 305 w  
~ Coal Plant Data Base  
Dates Costs(OOO) Costs ($/kW) Time Deviations  
Plant and Utility Order Finish MW Mult. so, CumCap Reg. Mixed 19'79 Mixed 1979 (yrs.) $/kW Time ---------- -- -- -- I Johnston 4 WY Pacific P&L 66.75 72.50 360 142342 w 64621 !35051 !80 375 5.75 -13.4  
2 Monroe 2 Ml Detroit Ed. 67.00 73.17 823 D !43124 M 122846 245689 149 299 6.17 +5.8  
3 Cumberland I TN TV A 67.25 73.17 1300 p 144359 SE 219275 437839 !69 337 5.92 +9.1  
4 Montour I PA Penn P&L 67.58 72.17 806 p 145125 NE 141729 301367 176 374 4.59 -12.2  
5 Big Brown 2 TX Texas Utils. 67.67 72.92 593 D 145688 sc 57834 116993 98 197 5.25 +5.9  
6 Stuart 3 OH Dayton P&L 67.83 72.33 6!0 D 146267 M 81490 171176 134 281 4.50 +1.2  
7 Labadie 3 MO Union Elec. 67.83 72.58 621 D 146857 M 125290 258869 202 4!7 4.75 +!5.9  
8 Centralia I WA Pacific P&L 67.83 72.92 730 p 14755! w 153060 309180 210 424 5.09 +3.2  
9 Cayuga 2 IN Indiana P.S. 67.92 72.42 53! D 148055 M 69415 144843 131 273 4.50 -2.5  
10 Cumberland 2 TN TV A 67.92 73.83 1300 D 149290 SE 171905 326314 132 251 5.91 +6.8  
II Coffeen 2 IL Central IL P.S. 68.00 72.67 617 149876 M 99155 203341 161 330 4.67 -7.3 +6.9  
12 Amos2 WV.AEP· 68.08 72.42 816 D 150652 M 102311 213194 125 261 4.34 -20.2 ~12.9  
13 Montour 2 P A Penn P &L 68.08 73.25 819 D 151430 NE 107348 211615 131 258 5.17 -14.5 +3.4  
14 Mill Creek I KY Louisville G&E 68.25 72.58 356 p 151768 M 62166 127953 175 359 4.33 -5.6 +8.6  
;l> 15 Eastlake 5 OH Cleveland Elec. 68.25 72.67 680 152414 M 109887 224803 162 331 4.42 -8.0 -1.4  
..,  
1l 16 Bowen 2 GA Georgia Power 68.25 72.67 806 D 153180 SE 92525 189285 115 235 4.42 +2.9 +3.0 "' 0.  
>i' 17 Labadie 4 MO Union Elec. 68.25 73.58 621 D 153770 M 102700 197551 165 318 5.33 + 12.6 + 11.1  
"" > Dates  
] Plant and Utitity Onler Filllsb MW Mull. so, CumCap  
i<' ""  
tv  
w  
18 Henderson I KY Big Rivers Coop  
19 Neal2 10 Iowa P.S.  
20 Edwards 3 IL Central IL Light  
21 Baldwin 2 IL Illinois Power  
22 Monroe 3 Ml Detroit Ed.  
68.42 73.25 180 p  
68.50 72.33 349  
68.50 72.42 364  
68.50 73.33 635  
68.58 73.33 823  
23 New Madrid I MO Associated Elec. 68.67 72.75 650  
p  
D  
p  
24 Gorgas 10 AL Alabama Power 68.75 72.42 789  
25 Powcrton 5 IL Commonwealth Ed. 68.75 72.67 893 p  
26 Concsville4 OH Columb. &So. OH 68.83 73.42 842  
27 La Cygne I KS Kansas City P&L  
28 Centralia 2 W A Pacific P&L  
29 Harrison I WV Potomac Elec.  
30 Mt. Stonn 3 WV Vepco  
31 Stout 3 IN Indianapolis P&L  
32 Harrison 2 WV Potomac E!ec.  
33 Erickson I MI City of Lansing  
34 Monroe 4 Ml Detroit Ed.  
35 Big Bend 2 FL Tampa Elec.  
36 Watson 5 MS Mississippi Pwr.  
68.83 73.42 873  
68.83 73.50 730 D  
68.92 72.92 684 p  
68.92 73.33 522  
68.92 73.50 471  
68.92 73.92 684 D  
69.17 73.67 160  
69.17 74.33 817 D  
69.25 73.25 446 D  
69.25 73.42 578  
S 37 Crist 3 FL Gulf Power 69.25 73.58 578  
153941  
154272  
154618  
155221  
156003  
156621  
157370  
158218  
159018  
s 159848  
160541  
161191  
161687  
162134  
162784  
162936  
163712  
164136  
164685  
165234  
Cllsts(OOO)  
Reg. Mixed 1979  
M 36307 71301  
M  
M  
M  
M  
M  
SE  
M  
M  
M  
w  
M  
M  
M  
M  
M  
M  
SE  
SE  
SE  
49150 102625  
70132 145543  
102718 2004!0  
122846 239444  
143907 291383  
98739 204328  
184042 374338  
130356 251689  
185146 357477  
153060 293903  
166559 332149  
160104 310680  
85275 163545  
111470 207748  
33747 63745  
113662 205282  
62995 122332  
66247 127143  
74514 141452  
Costs ($/k W) Time  
(yrs.)  
De'Viation.•  
Mixed 1979 $/kW Time  
202 396 4.83 + 16.9 +35.7  
141  
193  
162  
149  
221  
125  
206  
155  
212  
210  
244  
307  
181  
163  
211  
139  
141  
115  
129  
294 3.83 -18.8 -4.5  
400 3.92 + 10.3 ·-3.1  
316 4.83 -3.1 +8.0  
291 4. 75 +0.3 -6.6  
448 4.08 +21.5 -9.6  
259  
419  
3.67 -3.1 -8.4  
3.92 +4.5 -!8.3  
299 4.59 -19.0 -3.6  
409 4.59 -12.1 -4.5  
403 4.67 -2.0 -7.6  
486 4.00 +2.8 -13.5  
595 4.41 +59.7 -0.1  
347 4.58 -7.0 +5.5  
304 5.00 +22 -0.6  
398 4.50 +21.6 +25.3  
251 5.16 -2.6 -0.9  
274 4.00 +25.2 -2.7  
220 4.17 -20.0 +7.4  
245 4.33 -1!.2 + 11.3 w  
0  
00  
t  
,..,  
Dates  
Plant ll1ld Utility Order Finish MW Mull. SOz CumCap  
38 Amos 3 WV AEP 69.25 73.75 1300  
39 Powerton 6 IL Commonwealth Ed. 69.25 75.83 893 D  
40 Cliffside 5 NC Duke Power 69.33 12.42 571  
4 I Culley 3 IN So. Indiana G&E 69.33 73.42 265  
42 Mich. City 12 IN No.lndianaP.S. 69.33 74.25 521  
43 Belews Creek I NC Duke Power 69.33 74.58 1080 P  
44 Belews Creek 2 NC Duke Power 69.33 75.92 1080 D  
45 Mill Creek 2 KY Louisville G&E 69.42 74.50 356 D  
46 Gavin 1 OH AEP  
47 Roxboro 3 NC Carolina P&L  
48 Sutton 3 NC Carolinia P&L  
69.42 74.75 1300  
69.50 73. 17 745  
69.58 72.42 447  
49 Ghent I KY Kentucky Utils. 69.58 74.08 557  
50 San Juan 2 NM New Mexico P.S. 69.83 73.83 329  
51 Navajo I AZ Salt River Proj. 69.83 74.33 803  
p  
p  
p  
p  
52 Stuart 4 OH Dayton P&L 69.83 74.42 610 D  
53 Harrison 3 WV Potomac Elec.  
54 Gavin 2 OH AEP  
55 Comanche I CO Colorado P.S.  
56 Bowen 3 GA Georgia Power  
69.83 74.92 684 D  
69.83 75.50 1300  
69.92 73.92 350  
69.92 74.33 952  
D  
p  
p  
166469  
167318  
167860  
168112  
168607  
169633  
170659  
170997  
172232  
172940  
173364  
173893  
174206  
174969  
175548  
176198  
177433  
177766  
178670  
Reg.  
Costs(OOO)  
Mixed 1979  
M 363934 628930  
M  
SE  
M  
M  
152372 245758  
92966 190837  
54691 104841  
128437 232779  
SE 168703 298823  
SE 180761 289125  
M  
M  
50506 89859  
324604 567540  
SE 114118 222014  
SE 71922 147075  
M I I 1693 204189  
w 85753 158725  
w 205845 368687  
M  
M  
105292 187431  
98371 I 69081  
M 243083 399632  
w 94509 173650  
SE 129205 231170  
Costs ($/k W)  
Mixed 1979  
Time  
(yrs.)  
O.,viations  
$/kW Time  
280  
171  
163  
206  
247  
156  
167  
142  
250  
153  
161  
201  
261  
256  
173  
144  
187  
270  
136  
525 4.50 + 17.5 -14.6  
275 6.58 + 1.0 + 23.0  
334 3.09 +2.1 -23.0  
396 4.09 +3.7 +2.4  
447 4.92 + 16.8 +9.1  
277  
268  
252  
437  
298  
5.25 -8.6 + 16. I  
6.59 -8.9 +34.2  
5.08 -12.2 + 10.5  
5.33 -9.8 -0.7  
3.67 -10.6 -14.2  
329 2.84 -1.4 -27.4  
367 4.50 -4.8 -3.0  
482 4.00 +2.4 -5.4  
459 4.50 + !.2 -9.4  
307 4.59 -9.6 - 10.5  
247 5.09 -2.6 -2.9  
307  
496  
243  
5.67 -II .4 -3.9  
4.00 -5.4 -7.4  
4.41 -11.9 -0.4 ~ Dates Costs (000)  
-g Plant and Utility Order Finish MW Mult. SOz CumCap Reg. Mixed 1979  
~ >< 57 Gaston 5 AL Alabama Power  
N  
58 Navajo 2 AZ Salt River Proj.  
59 Navajo 3 AZ Salt River Proj.  
60 Monticello I TX Texas P&L  
61 Monticello 2 TX Texas P&L  
69.92 74.58 952  
69.92 75.25 803 D  
69.92 76.25 803 D  
70.08 74.92 593 p  
70.08 75.92 593 D  
62 Henderson 2 KY Big Rivers Coop 70.42 73.92 1~0 D  
63 Smith 2 KY Owensboro Muni  
64 Bridger I WY Pacific P&L  
65 Huntington 2 UT Utah P&L  
66 Big Stone l SD Otter Tail Power  
67 Bowen 4 GA Georgia Power  
68 Colstrip I MT MonLma Power  
69 Bridger2 WY Pacific P&L  
70 Rush Island J MO Union Elec.  
71 Mansfield I PA Ohio Edison  
72 Mansfield 2 PA Ohio Edison  
73 Drake 7 CO Colo. Springs  
74 Columbia 1 WI Wisconsin P&L  
70.42 74.17 265  
70.42 74.67 56! p  
70.50 74.50 446 p  
70.50 75.42 456  
70.50 75.83 952 D  
70.50 75.83 358  
70.50 75.67 561  
70.50 76.17 621  
70.50 76.25 914  
p  
D  
p  
p  
70.50 77.75 914 D  
70.67 74.25 127  
70.75 75.33 545  
75 New Madrid 2 MO Associated Elec. 70.75 77.42 650 D  
""  
~ 76 Bridger3 WY Pacific P&L 70.83 76.67 56! D  
179574  
!80337  
181!00  
181663  
182227  
182398  
182650  
183183  
183606  
184039  
184944  
s 185284  
185817  
186407  
s 187275  
s 188143  
188264  
188782  
189399  
189932  
SE  
w  
!56542 275340  
194548 325902  
w 251406 387851  
sc 128772 220689  
sc  
M  
M  
w  
w  
M  
75131 118959  
36307. 66236  
45129 81140  
174823 303940  
13624ll 239456  
163185 267897  
SE 130382 206846  
w  
w  
M  
158543 251522  
187444 301433  
223335 344046  
NE 454152 694519  
NE 340437 452932  
w  
M  
M  
w  
22666 45185  
144959 2391 16  
168675 230178  
165716 242364  
Costs ($/kW)  
Mixed 1979  
Time  
(yrs.)  
DevilltiOfiS  
$/kW Time  
164 289 4.66 -0.3 +4.9  
242  
313  
217  
127  
202  
170  
312  
305  
358  
137  
443  
334  
360  
497  
372  
178  
266  
260  
295  
406 5.33 -0.7 -2.4  
483 6.33 -· 1.0 + 15.6  
372 4.84 +3.6 +0.8  
20! 5.84 +3.4 + 12.2  
368 3.50 +5.3 16.9  
306 3.75 -23.8 -10,1  
542 4.25 + 10.2 - 11.0  
537 4.00 +3.0 -12.8  
587 4.92 +45.6 +6.7  
217 5.33 -13.8 +9.2  
703  
537  
5.33 +3.8 +20.2  
5.17 +9.3 -0.7  
554 5.67 + 17.5 + 15.6  
760 5.75 + 18.4 +9.2  
496 7.25 + 18.0 +26.8  
356 3.58 -30.8 -3.8  
439 4.58 +7.0 -5.1  
354 6.67 +8.1 +23.6  
432 5.84 +7.8 +10.9 w  
0  
€  
'8  
5.  
;;·  
"'  
Dates Costs (000)  
Plant and Ulility Order Finish MW Mull. SOz CumCap Reg. Mixed 1979  
77 Yates 6 GA Georgia Power  
78 Yates 7 GA Georgia Power  
79 Gibson 2 IN Indiana P.S.  
80 Baldwin 3 IL Illinois Power  
81 Olds 2 ND Basin Electric  
82 Gibson I IN Indiana P.S.  
70.92 74.33 404 p  
70.92 74.33 404 D  
70.92 75.25 668 p  
70.92 75.42 635 D  
70.92 75.92 460  
70.92 76.33 668 D  
83 Sherburne I MN No. States Power 70.92 76.33 720 p  
84 Miami Fort 7 OH Cincinnati G&E 71.08 75.33 557  
85 Neal3 10 Iowa P.S. · 7!.08 75.92 550  
86 Rush Island 2 MO Union Elec. 71.08 77 '7 621 D  
87 Sehahfer 14 IN No.lndianaP.S. 71.17 76.92 521 I  
88 BigBend3 FL TampaEiec. 71.25 76.33 446 D  
89 Winyah I SC So. Carol. P.S. 71.58 75.17 315 p  
90 Spurlock I KY E. Ky. Power Co. 71.58 77.67 300  
91 Wansley I GA Georgia Pawer 71.67 76.92 952  
92 Sherburne 2 MN No. States Power 71.83 77.00 720 D  
93 Daniel I MS Mississippi Pwr. 71.83 71.67 548  
94 Duel, Creek I IL CentrallLLight 71.92 76.42 417  
95 Hayden 2 CO Colo.-Ute Elec. 72.17 76.67 275  
96 Comanche2 CO ColoradoP.S. 72.25 75.83 396 D  
190516  
190700  
191334  
191938  
192375  
193009  
s 193693  
194222  
194745  
195335  
195830  
196254  
1965'~  
196838  
198646  
s 199330  
199851  
s 200247  
200508  
200885  
SE  
SE  
M  
M  
M  
M  
M  
M  
M  
86293 152925  
86293 I 52925  
160276 265696  
124493 203485  
93852 146875  
I 15655 174371  
215222 324487  
I 18901 195459  
128421 200461  
M 138473 192110  
M 199557 282907  
SE 134308 201215  
SE  
M  
64851 120684  
110760 144476  
SE 201765 28241 I  
M 147997 204751  
SE 144009 186449  
M 218853 319940  
w 128565 181796  
w 90863 139706  
Costs ($/kWJ Time  
Deviations  
Mixed 1979 (yrs.) $/kW Time  
214  
214  
240  
196  
204  
173  
299  
213  
233  
223  
383  
301  
206  
369  
212  
206  
263  
525  
468  
229  
379 3.41 +39.4 13.3  
379 3.41 +39.2 -·20.0  
398 4.33 1 j .8 - 14.1  
320 4.50 15.0 -16.9  
319 5.00 -23.0 +5.7  
261  
451  
351  
5.41 -12.3 -1.3  
5.41 -22.4 +5.3  
4.25 15.9 -13.6  
364 4.84 -12.8 1.5  
309 6.09 + 14.2 +I 1.9  
543 5.75 +29.5 + 17.8  
451 5.08 + 12.2 + 12.5  
383 3.59 -3.9 -8.6  
482 6.09 + 14.5 + 37.3  
297  
284  
5.25 -3.9 + 12.1  
5.17 -23.8 -·8.5  
340 5.84 -6.6 +33.7  
767 4.50 +43.3 -5.2  
661 4.50 +23.6 +2.0  
353 3.58 12.2 -29.8 i  
5.  
,..  
"'  
w  
Dates Costs(OOO)  
Plant and Utility ~ Finish MW Mull. S02 CumCap Reg. Mixed 1?79  
97 Gardner 3 NV Nevada Power  
98 San Juan l NM New Mexico P .S.  
99 Muskogee 4 OK Oklahoma G&E  
I 00 Colstrip 2 MT Montana Power  
101 Deely l TX SanAntonioP.S.  
102 Cardinal3 OH AEP  
103 Harrington l TX Southwest P.S.  
72.42 76.42 114  
72.42 76.92 348 D  
72.42 77.58 572 l  
72.50 76.58 358 D  
72.50 77.58 447  
72.50 77.67 650  
72.58 77.58 360  
s 200993  
201324  
201R67  
s 202207  
202632  
203249  
203846  
104 Conesville 5 OH Columb. & So. OH 72.58 76.83 444 s 204268  
s 205021  
206975  
207561  
s 208168  
105 Martin Lake I TX Texas Utils.  
106 Homer City 3 PA Penn. Electric  
107 Newton I IL Central ILP.S.  
108 Southwest I MO Springfield Ut.  
109 Welsh 1 TX Cent. & SW E.P.  
110 La Cygne 2 KS Kansas City P&L  
I II Huntington I UT Utah P&L  
112 Petersburg 3 IN Indianapolis P&L  
113 Young 2 ND Minnkota Coop  
114 Ghent 2 KY Kentucky Utils.  
115 Lansing 4 10 Interstate Power  
116 Winyah 2 SC So. Carol. P.S.  
72.58 77.33 793  
72.67 77.92 692  
72.75 77.83 6!7  
72.83 76.50 195  
72.83 77.17 558  
72.92 77.33 685  
I  
208698  
209349  
72.92 77.42 446 D 209773  
73.08 77.83 574 I S 210793  
73.42 77.33 477 s 212936  
73.50 77.00 557 D 213779  
73.67 77.42 275 215622  
74.00 77.50 315 D s 217:148  
w 69301 99713  
w 108503 148177  
sc 140921 180404  
w 127220 179439  
sc 108411 138373  
M 346000 437863  
sc  
M  
98000 124 707  
140821 192882  
sc 254643 331982  
NE 266147 326995  
M 232086 286652  
M 72868 I 02232  
sc 128554 168562  
M 229715 295394  
w 142107 181164  
M 290614 354469  
M 194477 244920  
M  
M  
SE  
130411 168878  
99033 122528  
74279 102583  
Costs ($/kW)  
Mixed 1?79  
Time  
(yrs.)  
Deviations  
$/kW Time  
608 875 4.00 +29.7 +5.9  
312  
246  
355  
243  
532  
272  
317  
321  
385  
376  
374  
230  
335  
319  
506  
408  
234  
360  
236  
426 4.50 -6.3 -9.8  
315 5.16 -3.4 +2.3  
501 4.08 -1.6 -18.8  
310 5.08 -5.4 +5.1  
674 5.17 +33.3 -0.1  
346 5.00 +5.5  
434 4.25 -19.8  
419 4.75 +0.9  
473  
465  
524  
5.25 -4.7  
5.08 +6.9  
3.67 -4.4  
302 4.34 -9.3  
431 4.41 - 1.3  
406 4.50 -5.1  
618 4.75 +11.8  
513 3.91 -7.6  
303 3.50 -16.2  
446 3.75 +0.2  
326 3.50 -9.3 Appendix3  
Conversion Of  
Capital Costs  
Into Constant Dollars  
This appendix describes the procedure used in this study to convert  
capital costs from mixed current dollars, the basis in which cost data are  
tabulated by utilities, into constant dollars, a form suitable for analyzing cost  
trends.  
The term ''mixed current dollars'' refers to the arithmetic sum of dollars  
spent in each different year of plant construction, unadjusted for inflation. The  
dollars are ''current'' because they were spent according to their then-current  
value. The sum is "mixed" because it combines dollars of varying values;  
because of inflation, a dollar spent in May 1976, for example, has a different  
(lower) value than a dollar spent in May 1971. Accordingly, the reported cost  
in mixed current dollars of a power plant constructed over a period of years is  
an amalgam of dollars· of different vintages and, therefore, of different values.  
Although such a figure is indeed the plant's actual cost, and determines its  
fixed charges for amortization and taxes, it does not represent accurately the  
value of the resources that were required for construction.  
Capital costs must be converted to constant dollars to obtain a true  
measure of value. A power plant's cost expressed in constant dollars represents  
what that plant would have cost if all expenditures had been made at one  
moment in time, when all dollars spent on the plant had equal value. The  
particular moment chosen to express costs is unimportant, since a plant's cost  
expressed in, say, 1979 dollars, will differ from the same plant's cost expres­sed in 1976 dollars, only by the rate of inflation from 1976 to 1979. Although  
constant-dollar cost figures are in a sense hypothetical, since power plants  
cannot be paid for and built instantaneously, such figures are not distorted by  
inflation. Thus, they can be employed to discern trends in costs that occur  
independently of price changes caused by inflation.  
Unfortunately, utilities either do not calculate capital costs in constant  
dollars or do not make such information available. Accordingly, a calcu!a­312 Appendix3 tiona! procedure must be developed and applied to the reported mixed-dollar  
costs to estimate constant-dollar costs. To understand the procedure, it is  
useful to think of current-dollar costs as the sum of three components:  
initial-year cost: expressed in constant dollars pegged to the date  
construction began, without inflation or interest during construc­tion;  
inflation during construction: increases in costs attributable to  
inflation in the prices of construction materials, equipment, and  
labor;  
interest during construction (!DC): dollars expended by the util­ity to pay off interest on the capital previously invested in the plant.  
The procedure followed here estimates the costs of inflation and interest  
during construction and subtracts them from the total reported cost in mixed  
current dollars. The remainder, initial-year costs, is then converted easily to a  
mid-1979 basis, the point in time chosen here for expressing costs in constant  
dollars.  
Ideally, the calculations would employ the particular rates of inflation  
and interest and the actual schedule of expenditures for each plant. Because  
these data too are unavailable, industry-wide estimates were developed using  
standard references and were applied to each plant.  
Average inflation rates for construction factors were obtained from the  
Handy-Whitman Index of Public Utility Construction Costs, a semi-annual  
compilation of wages, material costs, and other factor costs in power plant  
construction. 1 Line 16 in the index, "total fossil production plant,'' represents  
all inputs to fossil plant construction and, therefore, was used as the measure of  
inflation in construction inputs to coal plants. Since a single index for nuclear  
plants was developed only recently, a composite index was calculated from  
five Handy-Whitman categories pertaining to nuclear plants, as shown in Table  
A3.1.  
Because the Handy-Whitman index is compiled regionally, values of the  
index for nuclear and coal plants were derived as described above for each of  
the six U.S. geographical regions, and weighted by each region's share of the  
cost data bases. The shares used correspond to each region's percentage of  
plants in the sample and are shown in Table A3.2. Actually, the inflation rates  
yielded by the index vary little enough between regions that the degree of  
precision used here was probably unnecessary.  
National average values of the Handy-Whitman index for nuclear and  
fossil plants were calculated in this fashion for each year from January I. 1965  
to January l, 1979, and for the half-year to July I, 1979. They are shown in  
Table A3.3. The ratio between successive indices gave the intervening infla­tion rate. 1970 inflation, for example, was calculated by dividing the January  
Appendix3 313 3!4  
Table A3.!  
Weights Used To Calculate Composite Inftation Rate  
In Nuclear Construction  
Handy-Whitman FERC• Account  
Line No. and Categorl No. and Cat!:J<>r;t Weight••  
12 Turbogenerator Units 314 Turbine Plant .32  
13 Electrical Equipment 315 Electrical Plant .10  
14 Miscellaneous Equipment 316 Misc. Plant .03  
18 Structures & Improvements 321 (Same) .22  
19 Reactor Plant Equipment 322 NSSS .33  
*Federal Energy Regulatory Commission account categories for reporting power  
plant costs.  
**Weights were derived from an Energy Department estimate ofthe direct (unin­flated) costs of a standard 1150-MW nuclear plant. 2  
Table A3.2  
Geographical Weights Used  
To Calculate Composite Inftation  
Region• Nuclear Fossil  
North Atlantic .30 .08  
South Atlantic .41 .19  
North Central .24 .53  
South Central .06  
Plateau .14  
Pacific .05  
*Some Handy-Whitman geographical categories vary slightly from categories in  
study.  
Appendix 3 Table A3.3  
Inflation And Interest Rates  
Used To Adjust Costs  
Nuclear Coal  
Year Inflation,% Inflation, % Interest,%  
!965 2.7 2.0 3.8  
1966 2.2 2.6 3.9  
1967 3.6 3.1 4.0  
1968 4.4 3.8 4.3  
1969 5.8 6.3 4.6  
1970 8.1 7.2 5. I  
1971 10.1 I!. I 5.5  
1972 4.4 3.7 5.7  
1973 6.4 7.5 5.9  
1974 17.8 25. I 6.3  
1975 !0.8 9.0 6.8  
1976 7.9 6.9 7.0  
1977 5.9 6.3 7.1  
1978 9.3 10.8 7.5  
1979* 4.7 4.4 **  
*Inflation between January I and July I only.  
**1979 interest rate is not needed since data bases end in 1978.  
1971 index by the January 1970 value.  
Interest rates for calculating interest amounts during construction are  
also shown in Table A3.3. They were obtained from data compiled for inves­tor-owned utilities by the federal Energy Information Administration (EIA). 3  
Again, averages were employed because of the difficulty of obtaining the  
actual interest rates applicable to each plant. Interest rates actually vary little  
among utilities, in part because the embedded average cost of capital used to  
calculate IDC changes more slowly than the marginal cost of capital. Further­more, a check of publicly-owned utilities-municipals, electric co-operatives,  
state authorities, and the Tennessee Valley Authority-indicated that interest  
Appendix 3 315 rates on their projects were virtually always within one percentage point of the  
average interest rate for investor-owned utilities. Thus, little accuracy is lost  
by using an average interest rate drawn from the investor-owned group.  
Finally, a breakdown of the cash flow during construction is needed to  
calculate inflation and interest because inflation and interest rates vary from  
year to year. Actual cash flows were not obtainable for each plant, and  
therefore "typical" cash flow curves were applied to total plant costs to obtain  
annual cost breakdowns. Curves representing cash flow exclusive of interest  
and inflation during construction were taken from an Atomic Energy Commis­sion publication. 4 They are of the form,  
Y "" Y (I - cos( 1r /2 · X/X tf', max max  
where Y = cumulative cost expended after X years of construction  
X = total construction time (measured from date of NSSS  
max  
or boiler order to commercial operation)  
Y max = total cost  
Values of a and b were obtained by William Mooz of the Rand Corporation by  
applying a curve-fitting algorithm to the AEC curves. They are: coal,  
a=3.2386, b= 1.2932; nuclear, a=4.0820, b=3.2495. These values imply  
that half of expenditures exclusive of inflation and interest are made during the  
first 45% of the construction duration for coal plants and 53% for nuclear  
plants.  
With the foregoing annual inflation and interest rates and cash flow  
curves, one can calculate initial costs: a plant's hypothetical cost if it could  
have been built instantaneously at the moment it was ordered, with no inflation  
or interest during construction. This is done with the following equation: 5  
316  
T  
TC = IC• L a;  
i=l t=l  
IDC,  
t=i  
where TC = Total Completed Cost (in mixed current dollars)  
IC = Initial Cost (in initial year's dollars, without inflation  
or interest during construction)  
a. = Fraction of Initial Cost spent in year i 1  
INF I + construction inflation rate in year t  
t  
IDC = I + interest-during-construction rate in year t  
t  
T = Year of Commercial Operation  
Appendix 3 The equation calculates the initial cost that, when disaggregated into  
year-by-year expenditures which are supplemented by inflation and interest  
during construction, will total to the final cost in mixed dollars. Inflation  
accrues from plant start to the moment each dollar is spent. Interest is incurred  
from the expenditure of each dollar to the date of commercial operation, at  
which time the plant enters the rate base and ratepayers begin to pay for it,  
relieving the utility of the ne.ed to borrow additional capital to finance the plant.  
The initial cost, expressed in constant dollars of the year in which the plant was  
ordered, was then converted to July I, !979 dollars by multiplying by each  
year's inflation factor from plant order through July I, 1979.  
The resulting costs are referred to throughout the text as "steam-plant  
dollars" because the Handy-Whitman deflator used to calculate them is a  
measure of inflation in construction factors for steam-electric (fossil and  
nuclear) plants. Prices in the steam-electric sector have increased slightly  
faster than the prices of other industrial commodities (by an annual average of  
.64% for nuclear construction and .98% for fossil construction, based on a  
comparison of the Handy-Whitman index and the industrial producer price  
index during 1965-79). Therefore, the measures of real 1971-78 cost increases  
derived in this study-142% for nuclear plants and 68% for coal plants­slightly understate the true rates of cost increase relative to industrial prices.  
This difference is eliminated from projections of future costs, however, by  
incorporating an assumed real future inflation rate of I %/year in construction  
factor prices (relative to industrial prices) into the calculation of costs in 1979  
constant dollars (see Section 12.1). In addition, the small difference between  
past inflation rates for nuclear and fossil construction is reflected, properly, in  
the calculated costs of 1971 and 1978 standard nuclear and coal plants in 1979  
steam-plant dollars, since these costs were calculated by multiplying by the  
respective sector inflation rates through mid-1979.  
References  
l. Whitman, Requardt and Associates, Handy· Whitman Index of Public Uriliry Construe·  
tion Costs (semi-annual, Baltimore, MD).  
2. Telephone communication with H.!. Bowers, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 31 July  
1979.  
3. E!A, Statistics of Privately Owned Electric Utilities in the United States, 1977 edition,  
from "Average Interest Rate" under Tables 12 and 13, "Interest on Long-Term Debt." 1978  
figure was estimated by the author.  
4. AEC, Power Plant Capital Costs: Current Trends and Sensitivity to Economic  
Parameters, WASH-1345 (1974), p. 24.  
5. The equation was formulated by Lewis Per! in'' A Comparison of the Projected Cost of  
Electricity from the Palo Verde Nuclear Plant and Selected Coal-Fired Alternatives," Part !1, II  
July 1979 (National Economic Research Associates, New York, NY).  
Appendix 3 317 Appendix4  
Statistical  
Methodology  
This appendix discusses several issues pertammg to the statistical  
analyses used to discern capital cost trends. It contains: (I) a brief description  
of regression analysis; (2) an explanation of why a multiplicative form was  
used in the regression equations; and (3) a demonstration to show that the  
choice of regression models has only limited bearing on the calculated costs of  
standard 1971 and 1978 plants.  
Section A4.1: Regression Analysis  
Regression analysis is the standard statistical technique for estimating  
the extent to which changes in the value of a "dependent variable" are related  
to changes in one or more "causal" or "independent variables." In this study,  
the dependent variable is the capital cost or construction time of nuclear or coal  
plants. Independent variables that were found to have "statistical signifi­cance" in explaining changes in cost or duration included multiple units,  
Northeast location, unit size and architect-engineer experience (for nuclear  
plants), use of scrubbers (for coal plants), and the cumulative amount of  
nuclear or coal capacity operating or under construction in the U.S. ("sector  
size"), among others.  
The statistical significance of a regression equation is best indicated by  
two measures in combination: t-ratios and r2 values.  
T-ratios: The t-ratio is the measure of the statistical significance of the  
relationship of the dependent variable (capital cost) to an independent vari­able. Technically, it is the ratio of the independent variable's "correlation  
coefficient" to its "error coefficient." The higher the t-ratio, the smaller the  
probability that the true relationship between the dependent and independent  
variables differs from the relationship indicated by the correlation coefficient.  
The t-ratio therefore determines the statistical significance of a correlation  
coefficient.  
Statistical significance levels depend on the size of the data sample as  
318 Appendix4 well as on the t-ratio. They may be obtained by consulting a table of' 'Student's  
Hest" in any statistics textbook. A standard 95% significance level has been  
used as the threshold of statistical significance throughout this study, with  
several minor exceptions. Significance levels are displayed for each variable in  
the regression equations in Chapters 8 and 9. The "95% confidence limits'  
the values of a coefficient which bound its true value with 95% probability­are stated for each independent variable discussed in the two chapters.  
r 2 value: The r2 value, or "multiple correlation coefficient," of a  
regression equation is the correlation between the actual values of the depen­dent variable (i.e., the capital costs of all nuclear or coal plants) and the values  
that are calculated from the equation for each data point, using the values of the  
independent variables for each point. The r2 therefore measures the "goodness  
of fit'' of the regression equation to the data from which the equation is drawn.  
It ranges from zero to one, with higher values indicating a better fit of the  
equation to the data. A graph or "scatterplot" of an equation with a high r2  
would show the actual data points close to the "trend line" of the equation,  
with relatively little "scatter" between the line and the points.  
Section A4.2: Form Of The Regression Equations  
The regression equations in Chapters 8 and 9 have a multiplicative form,  
that is, capital costs are expressed as the product of the values and coefficients  
of the separate independent variables. The equations were deliberately expres­sed in multiplicative form rather than a linear, or additive, form. Multiplica­tive form makes it possible to express the effects of variables such as Northeast  
location or multiple status as percentage increments or decrements to costs,  
e.g., multiple units are approximately 10% cheaper to build than other units. In  
a linear model, these variables would appear as absolute increments or deere­merits, e.g., plus or minus $50/kW-an untenable formulation when costs of  
plants within the sample vary so widely, from $281/kW to $1, 113/kW for  
nuclear plants (without interest during construction). With multiplicative form  
it is also possible to express the effects of increased architect-engineer experi­ence or unit size as percentage reductions in costs-the conventional method  
of denoting scale or learning effects.  
In addition, costs were expressed as a polynomial function of sector size  
(i.e., cost was made proportional to sector size raised to a numerical power)  
because of the relationship between reductions in risk and increases in cost.  
First, it was assumed as a rough approximation that constant percentage  
increases in costs are necessary to effect constant percentage reductions in  
per-reactor accident risks or in per-plant emissions of pollutants. Such rela­tionships are frequently observed in risk applications and pollution control  
technology. Then,  
Appendix4 3!9 dC  
dR = -k,  
where C = cost, R = risk, k is a constant, and d is a mathematical symbol  
denoting small changes in a variable. Using integral calculus,  
fc =~-~-:~:. or,  
If, as argued in this study, society acts to maintain more or less constant total  
risk or emissions from the nuclear or coal sectors, we have  
R=--• k  
MW  
where MW = the size of the respective sector and k denotes another constant.  
Combining the two equations, we have  
c =(~w)-k,or,  
C = MWk_  
That is, plant cost equals (or is proportional to) sector size (MW) raised to a  
power. The particular values ofk derived here, .58 for nuclear and .61 for coal  
(when the effect of scrubbers is measured separately), arise from the actual  
plant costs and values of sector size and other independent variables in the data  
samples.  
Section A4.3: lnd~pendence Of Costs Of 1971 And 1978  
Standard Plants  
This section presents an illustrative calculation demonstrating that the  
calculated costs of 1971 and 1978 hypothetical standard plants are only slightly  
sensitive to the particular regression model used to measure cost trends. The  
calculation shown is for nuclear plants; coal plants yield a similar result.  
The equations in Tables 8.1 and 8.2 may be used to calculate costs for  
1971 and 1978 nuclear plants. Table 8. I presents the results of a regression  
equation in which capital costs were assumed to be related to the size of the  
nuclear sector (cumulative nuclear capacity) in addition to other independent  
variables such as unit size. In Table 8.2, capital costs were assumed to be  
related to the date each nuclear plant received its construction permit (CP  
date).  
320 Appendix 4 The two equations were applied to the characteristics of standard 1971  
and 1978 plants shown in Table 10.3. The values chosen for CP date (a  
parameter not listed in the table) were 66.75 (i.e., October 1966) for the  
1971-completed plant and 71.25 (April 1971) for the 1978-completed plant.  
The former date is the date of CP award for the last several reactors licensed  
before the start of the data base; it corresponds to the value of9800 MW used to  
represent sector size immediately preceding the sample. CP date for the end of  
the sample was taken as April 1971, although the last of the 46 sample plants to  
be licensed, Farley I, actually received its CP in August 1972. However, this  
was 17 months after the immediately preceding plant, Davis-Besse, received  
its CP, and therefore April 1971, one month after Davis-Besse's CP date, was  
chosen as a more conservative value.  
Costs calculated with these assumptions, exclusive of interest during  
construction, were as follows: for 1971 plants, $339/kW with the model using  
sector size and $389/kW using CP date; for 1978 plants, $798/kW using sector  
size and $848/kW using CP date. The costs with CP date are higher in both  
instances, by 15% for 1971 plants and by 6% for 1978 plants. When real !DC is  
added to costs, the measured average 1971-78 rates of increase in real nuclear  
costs are 125% using CP date and 142% using sector size. The cost differences  
are noticeable but not particularly significant. Costs obtained by using CP date  
are higher, moreover, than those obtained when costs are made a function of  
sector size. Accordingly, neither the very large 1971-78 real increase in  
nuclear costs nor the wide gap between the costs of 1978 nuclear and coal  
plants can be attributed to the use of the sector-size formulation to measure cost  
trends.  
Appendix4 321 Appendix5  
Acronyms  
ACRS  
A-E  
AEC  
AEOD  
AEP  
AFR  
AIF  
ANSI  
ASME  
ATWS  
B&W  
BWR  
CE  
CEP  
CFR  
DOE  
DOL  
ECCS  
EEl  
EIA  
EPA  
EPRI  
ERDA  
GAO  
GE  
GW  
IAEA  
IDC  
IEEE  
IREP  
KEA  
kW  
322  
Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards  
Architect-Engineer  
Atomic Energy Commission  
Analysis and Evaluation of Operational Data (Office of)  
American Electric Power Co.  
Away From Reactor (Waste Storage Facility)  
Atomic Industrial Forum  
American National Standards Institute  
American Society of Mechanical Engineers  
Anticipated Transients Without Scram  
Babcock & Wilcox  
Boiling Water Reactor  
Combustion Engineering  
Council on Economic Priorities  
Code of Federal Regulations  
Department of Energy  
Department of Labor  
Emergency Core Cooling System  
Edison Electric Institute  
Energy Information Administration  
Environmental Protection Agency  
Electric Power Research Institute  
Energy Research & Development Administration  
General Accounting Office  
General Electric  
Gigawatt (one billion watts)  
International Atomic Energy Agency  
Interest During Construction  
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers  
Interim Reliability Evaluation Program  
Komanoff Energy Associates  
Kilowatt (one thousand watts)  
Appendix5 LOCA  
LWR  
MSIV  
MW  
NNI  
NRC  
NSPS  
NSSS  
O&M  
OBE  
PWR  
QA  
RCS  
RG  
RHR  
SDV  
SEP  
SSE  
TMI  
TVA  
ucs  
USI  
w  
Appendix 5  
Loss of Coolant Accident  
Light Water Reactor  
Main Stearn Isolation Valve  
Megawatt (one million watts)  
Non Nuclear Instrumentation  
Nuclear Regulatory Commission  
New Source Perfonnance Standards  
Nuclear Stearn Supply System  
Operating and Maintenance  
Operating Basis Earthquake  
Pressurized Water Reactor  
Quality Assurance  
Reactor Coolant System  
Regulatory Guide  
Residual Heat Removal (System)  
Scram Discharge Volume  
Systematic Evaluation Program  
Safe Shutdown Earthquake  
Three Mile Island  
Tennessee Valley Authority  
Union of Concerned Scientists  
Unresolved Safety Issue  
Westinghouse  
323 